,date,content
0,2025-09-23,"The Reds aim to maintain their winning run as attention turns to the domestic cup competition

When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.

The Liverpool vs Southampton live stream sees Arne Slot's side return to action as they begin their Carabao Cup journey.
Defeat in the Community Shield aside, Liverpool have had a perfect start to the new season. As well as winning their first game in the Champions League, the Reds still boast a 100 percent record in the Premier League following their victory over Everton on Saturday.
Attention now turns to the Carabao Cup, a tournament Liverpool have won a record 10 times before. A clash with Southampton, who have already beaten Northampton and Norwich in this competition, awaits in the third round, as Will Still's side aim to pull off a major upset at Anfield.
Even if Slot shuffles his pack, Liverpool should still control this match. Southampton will aim to hold out for as long as possible, but their backline will be severely tested - especially if Alexander Isak starts.
Here's where to watch Liverpool vs Southampton live streams in the 2025/26 Carabao Cup online from anywhere.
Liverpool XI: Mamardashvili; Frimpong, Leoni, Gomez, Robertson; Nyoni, Endo; Ngumoha, Jones, Chiesa; Isak.
Southampton XI: McCarthy; Jelert, Edwards, Wood, Quarshie; Jander, Manning, Downes; Scienza, Archer, Armstrong.
If you're based in the UK, you can watch Liverpool vs Southampton for FREE on ITV.
ITV has the rights to broadcast 10 Carabao Cup matches this season for FREE. All you need is a valid TV license. You can also watch these matches online via the ITVX streaming service.
If you're travelling outside of the U.K. during the tournament you can access your ITV stream using NordVPN.
NordVPN – get the world's best VPNWe regularly review all the biggest and best VPN providers and NordVPN is our #1 choice. It unblocked every streaming service in testing and it's very straightforward to use. Speed, security and 24/7 support available if you need – it's got it all.The best value plan is the two-year deal which sets the price at $2.91 per month, and includes an extra 4 months absolutely FREE. There's also an all-important a 30-day no-quibble refund if you decide it's not for you.
- Try NordVPN 100% risk-free for 30 days
 



The Liverpool vs Southampton live stream is on Paramount+ in the US.
The Paramount+ Essential package costs $7.99 per month or $59.99 per year, while Paramount+ with Showtime (which allows you to stream over 40,000 movies and TV episodes without ads) costs $12.99 per month or $119.99 per year.
Carabao Cup soccer is available with both deals, and you can also watch EFL matches on the platform.
Outside the U.S. for Liverpool vs Southampton? Use NordVPN to access your usual streams.
 



As alluded to previously, Liverpool vs Southampton live stream will be on ITV1 and ITVX in the UK, with Sky Sports providing an alternative.
Sky Sports will show all of the EFL Cup fixtures over the season. Sky Sports packages start from £22 per month. Or you can use a more flexible streaming option, Now, (formerly Now TV). Now sports passes start at £14.99.
If you're travelling outside the U.K. during the season make sure you use NordVPN to tap into your home streams.
 



Football fans in Australia can watch Liverpool vs Southampton on beIN Sports and Amazon Prime.
beIN Sports is available for AU$15.99 per month and it’s available via Prime Video Channels as an add‑on for AU$14.99/month.
Outside Oz travelling? Use NordVPN to watch Liverpool vs Southampton.
Click to see more Liverpool vs Southampton streams▼
Residents of the following African countries can watch Carabao Cup live streams via Startimes Sports Life.
Burundi, Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Tanzania, Uguanda and Zambia.
Click to see more Liverpool vs Southampton streams▼
DAZN Canada has the rights to the Carabao Cup in Canada, including Liverpool vs Southampton.
Residents of the following Latin American countries can watch Carabao Cup 2025/26 live streams with a Disney+ subscription:
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Click to see more Liverpool vs Southampton streams▼
The Carabao Cup 2025/26 will be shown by various broadcasters and streaming services throughout Europe. You can check out specific information about your country below.
Digitalb has the rights to show Carabao Cup action this season.
Carabao Cup live streams in Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden can be found on Viaplay.
You can watch the Carabao Cup 2025/26 on Arena Sport channels in this set of countries.
There will be coverage of Carabao Cup 2025/26 in France on beIN Sports.
In Germany, the Carabao Cup 2025/26 rights are owned by Sky.
Greeks should head to Cosmote TV and Oglivy for the Carabao Cup 2025/26.
Setanta Sports will show the Carabao Cup 2025/26 in Ukraine.
Click to see more Liverpool vs Southampton streams▼
The Carabao Cup 2025/26 rights for these countries are held by Setanta Sports.
In China, the Carabao Cup 2025/26 will be shown by CSM.
TVB is the place to go for the Carabao Cup 2025/26 in Hong Kong.
FanCode is the Carabao Cup 2025/26 broadcaster for India plus Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
DAZN will show the Carabao Cup 2025/26 in Japan.
Head to Reddentes in Indonesia for the rights to the Carabao Cup 2025/26.
Reddentes is the home of the Carabao Cup 2025/26 in the Malaysia.
Singtel and Mediacorp provide coverage of the Carabao Cup 2025/26 in Singapore.
Coverage of the Carabao Cup 2025/26 in South Korea can be found at Coupang.
Click to see more Liverpool vs Southampton streams▼
beIN Sports and Amazon Prime have the rights to the Carabao Cup 2025/26 in Australia.
beIN Sports is the Carabao Cup 2025/26 TV rights holder in New Zealand.
Click to see more Liverpool vs Southampton streams▼
BeIN Sports MENA is the Carabao Cup 2025/26 broadcaster across the Middle East.
You can watch the Carabao Cup 2025/26 live streams with a subscription to BeIN Sports in the following Middle East countries:
Bahrain, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
We test and review VPN services in the context of legal recreational uses. For example: 1. Accessing a service from another country (subject to the terms and conditions of that service). 2. Protecting your online security and strengthening your online privacy when abroad. We do not support or condone the illegal or malicious use of VPN services. Consuming pirated content that is paid-for is neither endorsed nor approved by Future Publishing.
Sign up for breaking news, reviews, opinion, top tech deals, and more.
Greg Lea is a freelance football journalist from London. He primarily covers the Premier League but also has experience covering other European competitions. He is the former editor of The Set Pieces and has had work published by the likes of the Guardian, FourFourTwo, Goal.com, ESPN and more. He became a Crystal Palace fan after watching a 1-0 loss to Port Vale in 1998, and once got on the scoresheet in a primary school game against Wilfried Zaha's Whitehorse Manor (an own goal in an 8-0 defeat).
You must confirm your public display name before commenting
Please logout and then login again, you will then be prompted to enter your display name.

TechRadar is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.

©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 

Please login or signup to comment

Please wait..."
1,2025-09-23,"As a recent project to connect thousands of homes and businesses in Nigeria to solar power has demonstrated, modest investments can achieve dramatic advances in clean energy across the developing world. These projects' success depends on a coalition of public, private, and philanthropic partners united by a shared goal.
 ABUJA/DUBAI/SEATTLE – In Kiguna, a rural community in Nigeria, the fish trader Blessing Bitrus used to have just a few precious hours to sell the day’s catch of tilapia and catfish from the nearby river before it spoiled under the hot sun. Despite keeping prices low, nearly half of her fish went to waste most days. 
 But Blessing no longer needs to race against the clock owing to a three-ton cold-storage room connected to a solar-powered mini-grid. The intense sunlight that used to spoil her fish now enables its preservation. Blessing is not the only one to benefit: around 100 local fishers and traders use the room. The resulting reduction in food waste has increased average earnings by 30%. 
 Kiguna’s refrigeration unit and solar power was built as part of a larger clean-energy project that began in 2021 and has since connected 6,000 homes and businesses to solar power in five Nigerian states. As the international community grappled with the COVID-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine, this quiet clean-energy transformation boosted the resilience and productivity of farmers and other food producers, created jobs, and supported sustainable development in rural communities across Nigeria. 
 That outcome holds an important lesson for today’s world. Rising geopolitical uncertainty has led many wealthy governments to slash foreign aid – a devastating blow to global development efforts. As a result, projects are shutting down, people are losing access to essential services, and many countries are increasingly at risk of a humanitarian crisis. But even against this challenging backdrop, the world leaders gathering at this week’s United Nations General Assembly can still find ways to address slow-burning problems. 
 One of those problems is that nearly 600 million people in Sub-Saharan Africa still lack access to electricity. With Africa’s youth population projected to grow by 138 million people over the next quarter-century, this energy crisis could become an employment crisis. To generate enough good jobs for Africa’s growing population, we must help countries across the continent expand access to affordable and reliable clean energy, and provide local communities with the tools and training to turn that power into opportunity. 
 The good news is that there is a path to progress – even amid a tighter funding environment. Leading the way is Mission 300, which brings together African governments, the private sector, and philanthropic organizations to provide electricity to 300 million Africans by 2030. 
Catch up on the discussions from our Climate Week NYC event. Watch global leaders and experts weigh in on the future of multilateralism, the new development economics, and the most effective levers of change.

WATCH NOW

 The clean-energy project that helped Blessing and her community shows how these stakeholders can work together effectively. A modest investment from the Nigerian government, coupled with catalytic philanthropic capital, was sufficient to encourage firms to invest in the project. Equally important were regulatory reforms that cut grid connection costs by up to 40% and reduced permitting timelines for new initiatives, creating a pipeline of projects and training programs that will reach hundreds of thousands of Nigerians. 
 This is not an isolated case. Relatively small investments have helped achieve dramatic advances in clean energy across the developing world. India’s first utility-scale battery storage system is expected to deliver reliable clean electricity to low-income consumers and drive a shift toward grid stability. In Haiti, mesh grids – decentralized mini-grids made up of interconnected clusters of rooftop solar panels – are powering some of the most remote communities and demonstrating a model for last-mile electrification in rural and conflict-affected areas. Likewise, Indonesia’s Tembesi floating solar power plant can serve as an example for expanding energy access in vulnerable coastal economies. 
 The Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet’s recently released 2025 impact report reveals the common factor underlying these projects’ success: a coalition of public, private, and philanthropic partners united by a shared goal. This highlights the importance of a multi-stakeholder and system-scale approach to tackling big problems. Such a strategy makes the most of limited funds, recognizes different perspectives and expertise, accommodates various levels of risk tolerance, and enables each actor to play to its strengths. 
 Every developing country and region has its own energy challenges, but progress is possible when governments, businesses, and philanthropies work together. As climate change worsens, energy crises mount, and multilateralism wanes, global stability will depend on replicating Blessing’s story many times over – in Africa and elsewhere. That makes multi-stakeholder partnerships more important than ever. 

Sep 16, 2025
Nirupama Rao


Sep 17, 2025
Daniel Innerarity & Fabrizio Tassinari


Sep 17, 2025
Nina L. Khrushcheva


Sep 17, 2025
Curtis J. Milhaupt & Angela Huyue Zhang


Sep 19, 2025
Lee Jong-Wha


                                 Writing for PS since 2025 
1 Commentary

Kashim Shettima is Vice President of Nigeria.

                                 Writing for PS since 2025 
1 Commentary

Carol Koech is Vice President for Africa at the Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet.

                                 Writing for PS since 2025 
1 Commentary

Jessica Uhl is a former president of GE Vernova, former CFO of Shell, and a member of the Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet’s Leadership Council.
Before posting a comment, please confirm your account. To receive another confirmation email, please click here.


                            It appears that you have not yet updated your first and last name. If you would like to update your name, please do so here.
                        
After posting your comment, you’ll have a ten-minute window to make any edits. Please note that we moderate comments to ensure the conversation remains topically relevant. We appreciate well-informed comments and welcome your criticism and insight. Please be civil and avoid name-calling and ad hominem remarks.




Your name




Your email




Friend's name




Friend's email




Message








First Name




Last Name




Email




Please provide more details about your request







We hope you're enjoying our PS content


Subscribe

To have unlimited access to our content including in-depth commentaries, book reviews, exclusive interviews, PS OnPoint and PS The Big Picture, please subscribe
In our fast-changing physical world, complacency in the face of climate risks could be catastrophically wrong. The 2008 global financial crisis showed that financial markets and regulators are perfectly capable of neglecting major threats, only this time there will be no one on the winning side of a short bet.
At this year's United Nations General Assembly, the international community must recognize its collective responsibility to end the spiral of violence in the Middle East. This is the moment to start generating positive dynamics in favor of the only viable solution: an Israeli and Palestinian state, side by side.
Support Project Syndicate

Subscribe
Upgrade
Donate


Get our weekly newsletter









Make your inbox smarter.

            Select Newsletters
        













Please log in or register to continue. Registration is free.

Email
required



Password
required


Remember me?



                                    Please enter your email address and click on the reset-password button. If your email exists in our system, we'll send you an email with a link to reset your password. Please note that the link will expire twenty-four hours after the email is sent. If you can't find this email, please check your spam folder.
                                




Reset Password
Cancel


Email
required



            By proceeding, you are agreeing to our Terms and Conditions.
        




                                 
                            

                                 
                            
Sign in with

Facebook


 Google


Microsoft


X


Your Institution



To receive email updates regarding this {entity_type}, please enter your email below.    






            If you are not already registered, this will create a PS account for you. You should receive an activation email shortly.
        "
2,2025-09-23,"First Lady of Nigeria, Oluremi Tinubu
First Lady, Oluremi Tinubu, has received N20.4 billion donations from her birthday well wishers for the completion of the National Library project in Abuja.
Mrs Tinubu disclosed this on Tueday while addressing State House correspondents during a lunch briefing at the Presidential villa Abuja.
The first lady celebrated her 65th birthday on Sunday 21 September.
The National Library project, initiated in 1981 by the Shehu Shagari administration and approved with funding in subsequent years, had faced decades of funding delays, with the budget escalating from ₦8.2 billion in 1981 to ₦23 billion as of 2023.
The first lady disclosed that as at 2 p.m. on Tuesday 23 September, the fund she received to complete the project had risen to N20.4 billion.
“I have played my part in this project, and believe Nigerians can raise the funds needed to complete the library. This is not just a project but a national treasure that will serve generations to come,” she said.
Mrs Tinubu said the signatories to the account are the Minister of Education and the Chief Librarian of the Federation, insisting hers was to help drive the funds.
She appreciated various contributors, including President Bola Tinubu, Vice President Kashim Shettima and his wife, former President Muhammadu Buhari, and several former first ladies,
Others are the Senate President, Godswill Akpabio, and his wife, Speaker of the House of Representatives Abbas Tajudeen, and his wife, members of the National Assembly, the Nigeria Governors Forum, the governors’ spouses, security chiefs and their wives.
She also acknowledged business moguls including Aliko Dangote, Abdulsamad Rabiu, Arthur Eze, Tony Elumelu,Jim Ovia and others.
Mrs Tinubu explained that the birthday account, Oluremi@65 Education Fund, will remain open till December 2025 to receive more donations from willing Nigerians towards the completion of the project.
Mrs Tinubu also debunked claims that her 65th birthday anniversary fundraiser is politically motivated.
She pointed out that as a teacher, as well as the impact library had on her life while growing up, she was motivated to call for the donations towards the building of the National Library.
“What is wrong in doing well or trying to build our country? if I could assist the post war building process in Liberia by donating the Oluremi Tinubu Elementary and Junior Secondary School in Monte Serrado County in Liberia, what is wrong in drawing attention to some of the areas of need in our beloved nation?
“This is not the first time I have raised funds for causes close to my heart. For my 45th birthday, I raised ₦50 million to complete the National Sickle Cell Foundation Centre, which has since become fully operational. For my 50th birthday, I raised ₦200 million for the New Era Foundation and other charities,” she said.
TEXT AD: Call Willie - +2348098788999




 All content is Copyrighted © 2025 The Premium Times, Nigeria 
Login to your account below








Remember Me






Please enter your username or email address to reset your password.












- Select Visibility -PublicPrivate 
All content is Copyrighted © 2025 The Premium Times, Nigeria"
3,2025-09-23,"
PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases is the top Open Access tropical medicine journal, featuring an International Editorial Board and increased support for developing country authors.
  


Get Started
    

Loading metrics
Open Access
Peer-reviewed
Research Article

Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Formal analysis,

    Investigation,

    Methodology,

    Visualization,

    Writing – original draft
  
 * E-mail: jessicadunoyer16016@gmail.com
Affiliation
    London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
  




        https://orcid.org/0009-0000-8311-4705
      



Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Methodology,

    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
  

Roles
    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Prospective and Cooperation, Marseille, France
  

Roles
    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    United Nation Children’s Fund, New York, United States of America
  

Roles
    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    United Nation Children’s Fund, New York, United States of America
  

Roles
    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Prospective and Cooperation, Marseille, France
  

Roles
    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    United Nation Children’s Fund, New York, United States of America
  

Roles
    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Prospective and Cooperation, Marseille, France
  

Roles
    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Tufts University, Friedman School of Nutrition, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America
  

Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Methodology,

    Supervision,

    Validation,

    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom
  
Cholera, a severe fecal-oral disease, disproportionately affects the poorest communities who lack access to safe water and sanitation. Individuals living in the same household, or within a few hundred meters, of a patient are at increased risk of infection. Thus, during cholera outbreaks, targeted response strategies, such as case-area targeted interventions (CATIs), provide health (e.g., vaccination and antibiotic prophylaxis) and water, sanitation, and hygiene services for affected households and at-risk neighbors living in a defined ring. Previous research on CATIs has focused on impact and effectiveness, and less on implementation processes. As cholera outbreaks occur in diverse settings with differentiated challenges, we investigated how CATI and CATI-like mechanisms can be best used and adapted. Drawing on 43 peer-reviewed articles and gray literature sources retrieved through a narrative review, and 15 key informant interviews conducted using a snowball sampling approach, we identified 27 CATI or CATI-like experiences across 15 countries in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, and Middle East between 2004 and 2024. Four delivery mechanisms were identified: CATI, pre-CATI, case-cluster, and health-facility-based interventions (HBI). Challenges to implementation included: delays in response; difficulty accessing populations; resource shortages to initiate, maintain, or scale up response; overwhelmed response capacity; limited skills and knowledge; low uptake and acceptance; weak coordination; poor reporting and monitoring; and sustainability concerns. Implementers adapted delivery to overcome challenges, particularly in outbreaks with high case-loads and in insecure and hard-to-reach contexts by ensuring readiness and early activation, strengthening local actors’ capacity, optimizing resources, adjusting ring sizes, and prioritizing cases. Based on these results, we developed a practitioner-centered framework to optimize programmatic implementation through context-specific delivery mechanism and ultimately decrease cholera incidence.
Cholera, a life-threatening disease transmitted through contaminated food and water, disproportionately impacts poor communities with limited access to safe water and sanitation. People living near cholera patients face a heightened risk of infection, prompting the development of targeted responses to interrupt community transmission. These strategies aim to provide health, and water, sanitation, and hygiene services to affected households and neighbors. Our study identified different approaches to deliver health and WASH services, along with associated challenges and adaptations. We developed a practical framework to help implementers tailor targeted interventions to specific contexts to enable programmatic implementation success.
Citation: Dunoyer J, Ratnayake R, Moore S, Bulit G, Beaulieu S, Valingot C, et al.  (2025) Optimizing the implementation of case-area targeted interventions during cholera outbreaks with context-specific delivery mechanisms. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 19(9):
           e0013534.
        
        https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534
Editor: Joseph M. Vinetz, Yale University School of Medicine, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Received: March 5, 2025; Accepted: September 6, 2025; Published:  September 23, 2025
Copyright:  © 2025 Dunoyer et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
Data Availability: All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files.
Funding: The author(s) received no specific funding for this work.
Competing interests:  The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Cholera, a diarrheal disease caused by the ingestion of the bacterium Vibrio cholerae O1, poses a significant public health concern in low- and middle-income countries [1–3]. An estimated 1.3 to 4.0 million cholera cases, and 21,000–143,000 cholera deaths, occur each year [1]. This health threat, sometimes referred to as the “disease of poverty”, disproportionately affects the most vulnerable individuals who lack access to basic water and sanitation services [3,4]. In 2024, a cumulative total of 804,721 cholera cases and 5,805 deaths were reported across 33 countries [5]. This represents a marked increase compared to 2023: a 50% rise in cases and a 45% increase in deaths.
Cholera outbreaks tend to cluster geographically and temporally [6–9]. Household members of cholera patients face a relatively higher risk of infection [8,10]. Individuals living in close proximity to cholera cases (within a few hundred meters) are also at higher risk, especially during the first week after the cholera patient seeks treatment [6,8,11,12,13].
To control cholera, the case-area targeted intervention (CATI) approach has been developed [7]. CATIs specifically target the homes of cholera patients and their neighbors in a defined radius with water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) and health interventions, including administration of oral cholera vaccine (OCV) and selective antibiotic prophylaxis upon admission to cholera treatment facilities [8,14]. Although the concept of CATIs traces back to Cameroon in 2004 [8,14,15], its prominence grew after the 2010 cholera epidemic in Haiti and subsequent nationwide expansion led by UNICEF of an alert-response system in 2013 [16]. CATIs have been effective in reducing cholera incidence by significantly reducing cases (up to 76%) and shortening outbreak duration (up to 73%), with greater impact for prompt and intense response in Haiti [17]. In the Noth East Zone in Nigeria, clusters of cholera cases were fewer and smaller, occurred for shorter duration, and were less likely to reoccur in 2021 in the presence of CATIs implemented by Solidarités International (SI) and Action Contre le Faim (ACF) [18].
Similar delivery mechanisms that target areas surrounding case-households have also been developed, which are described herein as ‘CATI-like’ mechanisms. In this context, a delivery mechanism refers to the organized way in which interventions such as WASH supplies, health education, and vaccines are brought to affected populations. The case-cluster approach, which entails the delivery of targeted WASH and health interventions to households located within a cluster of cholera cases, was used in Conakry by ACF in 2012 [19]. In 2017, the health authorities in Kinshasa adopted a grid strategy, assigning teams to households within each grid for 14-day WASH and health responses in highly affected neighborhoods [20]. Health facility-based outreach activities were developed by Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) in Haiti in 2013 [21] and in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in 2017 [22], and by John Hopkins University (JHU) in Bangladesh in 2013 [23], and in DRC in 2020 [24]. In the MSF-led intervention in DRC, evidence showed a dose-response relationship, with higher use of hygiene kit (soap, point-of-use water treatment, a handwashing device, and a 20-liter jerrycan) linked to a 66% lower incidence of suspected cholera and a significant reduction in water contamination across all recipients. In the JHU-led project in Bangladesh, the intervention promoted handwashing with soap and point-of-use water treatment among cholera patients and their household members. Intervention contacts had 47% fewer Vibrio cholerae infections than controls, were more likely to wash hands during key times (18% vs. 50%), and had a 41% reduction in very high-risk households with stored drinking water after 6–12 months [23,25]. Overall, in multiple evaluations, CATI and CATI-like mechanisms have been found effective, and are now widely promoted in cholera response [8].
In these previous studies, barriers to CATI delivery have been identified, including: 1) difficulties in accessing patient homes (e.g., due to lack of address, flooding, insecurity, or stigmatization) [8,14], 2) delayed or partial access to the case home [8,14,26], 3) difficulties in achieving a sufficient case or ring coverage (e.g., during high case load, in densely populated areas, due to resource constraints) [8,14,26], and 4) limited funding and supplies [8,14,26,27].
However, despite identifying some challenges, previous research was not comprehensive and had less focus on developing recommendations for implementation. To date, recommendations on how to implement CATI and CATI-like mechanisms in different contexts have not been summarized or published, limiting cross-learning opportunities. We believe that optimizing CATI implementation across contexts is essential to enhance response timeliness, expand coverage, increase acceptance and uptake, improve cost-efficiency, and ultimately reduce the cholera disease burden.
We aimed to synthesize available evidence on adapting CATI and CATI-like mechanisms to inform global coordination platforms developing technical guidance for targeted cholera outbreak interventions. The study addressed four key objectives: 1) describe and categorize CATIs and CATI-like mechanisms used during cholera outbreaks, 2) identify and summarize recurrent and context-specific implementation challenges, 3) review and summarize implementation adaptations to optimize delivery in different contexts, and 4) develop an implementation framework for each delivery mechanism to improve the effectiveness of the response.
All interviewees were fully informed about the purpose of the research, their rights as participants, and measures in place to ensure confidentiality. Written informed consent was obtained from each participant before the interview. Additionally, a brief verbal reaffirmation of consent was conducted immediately before the interview, allowing participants an opportunity to ask final questions or seek clarification. To protect participant anonymity, transcripts and publications do not contain direct links to specific quotes or identifiable statements. Ethical approval for this study was granted by the LSHTM Ethics Committee (LSHTM #29997).
This research was mixed-method, including the following: 1) narrative review of peer-reviewed journal publications and gray literature published between January 1, 2000 and June 1, 2024, and 2) key informant interviews (KIIs) of researchers, cholera technical advisors, and/or implementers in five countries recently affected by cholera (DRC, Mozambique, Nigeria, Ethiopia, and Somalia). Objectives 1, 2, and 3 were investigated primarily using the narrative review, complemented by the KIIs. The narrative review and KIIs both informed development of the implementation framework for CATI and CATI-like mechanisms, tailored to different contexts (Objective 4).
The objective of this narrative review was to identify and characterize the delivery mechanisms, challenges, and adaptations made in implementing CATIs during cholera outbreaks, as reported in peer-reviewed and gray literature.
We conducted a literature search in the Medline and Embase databases for articles published between January 1, 2020, and June 7, 2024, using keywords related to cholera and CATIs. The below search terms were used:
The full search strategy is provided in S1 File. In addition, we retrieved gray literature published during the same period from organizational websites and coordination platforms (S1 Table). We also asked participants in KIIs to share relevant documentation.
To ensure completeness, we additionally included peer-reviewed articles and gray literature previously identified in two earlier systematic reviews on CATI effectiveness, which covered the periods January 1, 2009 – November 30, 2019 [14], and January 1, 2000 – April 24, 2020 [8].
We included records that:
We excluded records that:
To provide transparency and clarity in documenting the selection process, a PRISMA flow diagram was utilized (Fig 1).


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.g001
The objective of the KIIs was to describe the implementation of CATIs and CATI-like mechanisms in the five countries of DRC, Mozambique, Nigeria, Ethiopia, and Somalia including their programmatic implementation, limitations, challenges, opportunities, and recommendations. We purposively selected researchers, advisors, and implementers experienced in CATIs in those countries.
The countries were selected based on: their cholera burden (with Nigeria and the DRC being two major hotspots in Africa) [28,29]; their experience with original delivery mechanisms (DRC); and, in the case of Somalia (2023), Mozambique (2018), and Ethiopia (2023), the recent implementation of CATI and limited existing documentation. In the DRC, the Ministry of Health [20], Veolia Foundation, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) [22], Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [30], MSF [31] and JHU [24] have conducted studies on cholera targeted interventions. This country has extensive experience with CATIs and CATI-like mechanisms across various contexts, including those marked by endemic cholera, conflict, and remote locations. CATIs have been implemented in Nigeria’s North-East Zone by ACF and SI since 2021, and were evaluated by Johns Hopkins University [18,26]. They were also implemented in 2023 and 2024 by a consortium of national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) led by Goal Prime. The NE zone in Nigeria is characterized by population displacement and hard-to-reach areas due to insecurity and flooding. To our knowledge, and despite frequent cholera outbreaks, CATIs have not been formally evaluated in Mozambique and Somalia. In 2023, the Ministry of Health in Ethiopia, with the technical support of MSF, guided and documented the first known CATI response in the country [32].
Key informants were identified through a combination of a narrative review and recommendations from the GTFCC WASH and Surveillance Working Group leads, particularly for countries where CATI implementation is not well documented. Subsequently, a snowball sampling approach within each country further expanded the network.
We developed a semi-structured interview guide based on the narrative review to collect data (S2 File). Itcovered topics such as experience in CATI, description of CATI delivery, implementation challenges, adaptations, documentation, and referrals to additional interviewees.
We extracted data from the narrative review into an Excel-based Data Extraction Form (DEF), capturing publication details, study characteristics, interventions, outcomes, and summaries. We then conducted a thematic analysis using the DEF, focusing on contextual settings, challenges during CATI implementation, deployment strategies, and related limitations, opportunities, and improvements. The first author carried out interviews coding and interpretation and discussed and interpreted the findings with the wider team. Data from interviews were analyzed using the qualitative data analysis software NVIVO 14 (Denver, Colorado, USA). Themes identified during the narrative review informed the development of the interview guide.
Objective 1 - We established a comparative table, detailing each CATI or CATI-like experience by delivery mechanism, country, and intervention date with information on implementer(s), components, related contexts, implementation challenges, and adaptations. We included CATI and CATI-like experiences that were either documented in peer-reviewed articles or in gray materials or described through interviews. We qualified the experiences by (i) type of WASH intervention (e.g., household disinfection, hygiene promotion, point-of-use water treatment, soap distribution, emergency water supply or repairs, water quality intervention, and/or water quality monitoring), (ii) type of health intervention (e.g., selective chemoprophylaxis, oral cholera vaccine), (iii) type of implementer (e.g., government, non-governmental organizations, Red Cross), and (iv) contextual factors (e.g., territorial context, special conditions, cholera setting, socio-cultural aspects). Contextual descriptors were extracted directly from the original studies or reported by key informants. These terms were included only when explicitly referenced in the source material.
Objective 2 - We applied deductive coding to analyze the qualitative data, using a framework of implementation challenges derived from the thematic analysis of the narrative review. We then refined these codes by a second-order interpretive coding. Using Coggle (Oxford, United Kingdom), we structured these challenges into a mind map, organizing them into categories and subcategories while incorporating contextual features and their relationships. Each challenge category was qualified as context-specific and/or recurrent or less common. Context-specific challenges were identified based on the links between contextual features and the reported challenges in the mind map. To assess frequency, we used “challenge counts” from both the narrative review and the KIIs. Challenge counts from the narrative review (n) indicate the number of CATI and CATI-like experiences in which a given challenge was reported. Challenge counts from the KIIs reflect the number of respondents who mentioned a given challenge. Frequencies were expressed as percentages across the 18 CATI and CATI-like experiences in which implementation challenges were documented, and across the 15 interviewees. A challenge category was considered ‘recurrent’ if it appeared in at least 25% of the 18 published interventions and was mentioned by at least half of the respondents. It was classified as ‘less common’ if it appeared in fewer than 25% of published cases or was mentioned by less than half of respondents. We synthesized implementation challenges by category, drawing on findings from both the narrative review and the interviews. We also contrasted the challenges identified during the KII with those reported in the literature.
Objective 3 - Due to the limited number of adaptations made to intervention delivery, a similar classification method to the one used for implementation challenges was not feasible. Instead, the adaptations were grouped into two categories that emerged from the data: the first related to the different CATI-like mechanism strategies, while the second focused on adaptations made to enhance intervention delivery across all strategies. For the second type, adaptations were identified from the narrative review and during interviews, and were synthesized.
Objective 4 - We summarized contextual features, implementation challenges, adaptations made to intervention delivery, and expected effectiveness improvements in an implementation framework. We defined improvement in effectiveness as response timeliness, expanding coverage, increasing acceptance and uptake, and improving cost-efficiency based on previous reviews [8,14]. We then qualitatively assessed the expected gains in these areas following adaptations.
We included a total of 29 peer-reviewed articles and 14 gray literature documents after screening from the narrative review (Fig 1; S2 Table). The initial search in MEDLINE and EMBASE yielded 73 and 284 results, respectively. After removing 61 duplicates, 254 records were excluded during title and abstract screening, and 16 were not accessible. Of the 26 reports reviewed in full, 13 did not meet inclusion criteria. Thirteen new peer-reviewed articles were included, along with 14 records from previous reviews by Sikder et al. and Ratnayake et al., and two additional articles identified through citation searching. The grey literature comprised six documents from earlier systematic reviews and eight after the reviews were published.
Additionally, we conducted 15 KIIs with 18 respondents from DRC (n = 4), Mozambique (n = 7), North-East Zone in Nigeria (n = 2), Ethiopia (n = 2), and Somalia (n = 3). There were three group interviews, each involving two participants, conducted in DRC (n = 1), Mozambique (n = 1), and Somalia (n = 1). The respondents included implementers (n = 10), advisors (n = 7), and researcher (n = 1), and were affiliated with national NGOs (n = 6), international NGOs (n = 3), United Nations organizations (n = 5), government entities (n = 2), and one research center (n = 1).
A total of 27 distinct CATI or CATI-like experiences were identified through the narrative review and KIIs, and categorized by delivery mechanism, country, and intervention date (Tables 1 and 2). These interventions spanned from 2004 to 2024 and covered 15 countries. The majority of the countries were located in Africa (11/15), including Cameroon, DRC, Ethiopia, Guinea, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Uganda, and Zimbabwe. The other countries were in Southeast Asia (Bangladesh and Nepal), the Caribbean (Haiti), and the Middle East (Yemen).


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.t001


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.t002
Around half of the CATI and CATI-like experiences were implemented by a single actor (15/27; 56%), while several involved multiple actors (11/27; 41%), and in one case, the implementation arrangement was unknown (1/27; 3.7%). Government counterparts co-led about half of the responses (15/27; 56%), primarily through the Ministry of Health (14/15; 93%), with one led by the Ministry of Water. In most cases (17/27; 63%), an NGO was involved in implementation. The Red Cross was identified as an implementing actor in four experiences (4/27; 15%). Lastly, large-scale CATI responses spanning provinces, departments or districts were implemented in Haiti, Yemen, Mozambique, and DRC and were supported by UNICEF [33,34,30].
The majority of responses to cholera outbreaks included only WASH interventions (17/27; 63%), while approximately one-third were multisectoral, incorporating both WASH and health components (10/27; 37%). None of the experiences included health interventions alone. All CATI and CATI-like experiences included one or more WASH components: household disinfection (17/27; 63%), hygiene promotion (27/27; 100%), point-of-use water treatment (POUWT) (22/27; 81%), soap distribution (23/27; 85%), emergency water supply or repairs (5/27; 19%), water quality intervention (11/27; 41%), and/or water quality monitoring (11/27; 27%). Selective antibiotic prophylaxis was administered in about one-third of experiences (9/27; 33%), in Cameroon (Douala and Kribi) [15,27], Haiti (National and Centre department) [16,17], Uganda [35], DRC [7,20], and Ethiopia [32]. OCV was administered by MSF and partners in few CATI experiences (4/27; 15%), in Kribi (Cameroon) [27], Juba (South Sudan) [36], DRC [7], and the Somali Region (Ethiopia) [32], using doses left over from previous campaigns or purchased directly from the manufacturer (for the study in DRC).
CATI and CATI-like experiences were conducted in urban areas (15/27; 55%), rural areas (3/27; 11%), and mixed urban-rural settings (8/27; 30%), while the setting was unspecified in few (1/27; 4%) cases. Key contextual features included poor WASH conditions (12/27; 44%), conflict settings (11/27; 41%), densely populated areas (9/27; 33%), remote locations (6/27; 22%), slums (5/27; 18,5%) and camps (4/27; 15%). Interventions were documented in both epidemic (8/27; 30%) and endemic (5/27; 19%) settings, while the outbreak setting was not mentioned in approximately half of cases (14/27; 52%). Community mistrust was noted in about one-fifth of instances (22%; 6/27). Tables 1 and 2 shows the different documented CATI and CATI-like experiences by delivery mechanism, country, and intervention date, between 2004 and 2024.
We identified four types of delivery mechanisms, including CATI and three types of CATI-like mechanisms (pre-CATI, case-cluster, and health-facility based interventions (HBI)) (Fig 2). CATI was documented in 19 experiences, pre-CATI in one, case-cluster in two, and HBIs in five.
The figure was created using Wikipedia Commons (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Accueil).

The figure was created using Wikipedia Commons (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Accueil).

              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.g002
CATIs are defined as a multi-sectoral package of interventions delivered promptly after case presentation to case households and at-risk neighbors within a defined ring through mobile response teams (Table 1). This approach accounted for 70% (19/27) of all experiences and was the most extensively documented form of delivery mechanism [15–18,26,27,30–46]. Overall, 89% (17/19) of CATI experiences were conducted in urban settings, while nearly half (9/19; 47%) were in rural settings. Interventions occurred more frequently during the peak (7/19; 37%) and tail (10/19; 53%) phases than at the onset (4/19; 21%) of outbreaks.
Pre-CATIs are designed to occur before the mobile CATI team reaches cholera affected areas. Volunteers and community healthcare workers are trained to deliver CATI interventions upon case detection. This delivery mechanism was developed and scaled up by the Congolese Red Cross, with UNICEF support, in 2021 across three provinces in DRC (Table 2) (from KII). The documented Pre-CATI was carried out in rural, remote, and conflict-affected areas at the onset of the outbreak.
The case-cluster mechanism involves delivering a tailored set of interventions within a cluster of cases, based on georeferencing of case households and investigating potential sources of infection, with a focus on emergency water supply, and water quality intervention and monitoring at community-level (Table 2). The duration of the intervention is typically longer than in the CATI response, lasting up to 14 days in the grid strategy. Case-cluster mechanisms were documented in two instances: Conakry, Guinea (2012) by Action Against Hunger [19] and Kinshasa, DRC (2017) by the Ministry of Health with the support from the World Health Organization [20]. In Conakry, the case-cluster mechanisms included CATI activities such as daily georeferencing, home-disinfection, distribution of cholera kits, and hygiene promotion for affected households. Additionally, it involved identification and implementation of tailored interventions such as repairing a portion of the water distribution network and conducting tailored hygiene promotion for high-risk groups in persistent clusters [19]. In Kinshasa, a grid strategy consisted of mapping cases, marking 500-meter clusters, and conducting 14-day WASH interventions by community volunteers and selective chemoprophylaxis in each grid [20,30]. Both case-cluster experiences were conducted in urban and densely populated settings, during the peak and tail of a cholera outbreak [19,20].
HBIs were documented in five responses in Haiti [21,47], Bangladesh [23,25,48–50], and DRC [22,24,51] (Table 2). Subtype 1 involved distribution of different types of kits (e.g., hygiene kits, disinfection kits) to caregivers in MSF Cholera Treatment Centers in Haiti (2010–2011) [21] and Kasai Oriental, DRC (2017) [22,51]. Subtype 2 included Cholera-Hospital-Based-Intervention-for-7-Days (CHOBI-7) [23,48] and the Preventative-Intervention-for-Cholera-for-7-Days (PICHA-7) [24] programs, which have been piloted in Bangladesh and the DRC by JHU since 2014. These HBIs aim to reduce cholera transmission during the seven-day high-risk period for patients and their households by promoting safe WASH practices, including handwashing, water treatment and safe storage, through formative research for program design and in-person visits, and/or bi-weekly mobile messages for program delivery [24,50]. The majority of HBI experiences (4/5; 80%) were conducted in urban settings [21,23,24,47,48], with some in slum areas in Bangladesh and DRC [23,24,48]. Conflict settings were reported in two HBIs in Haiti and DRC [22,30,47,52]. Fig 2 shows the different types of approaches to provide WASH and health services to cholera-affected households and their neighbors.
We identified ten categories and 50 sub-categories of implementation challenges (S1 Fig; Table 3). Within the ten categories, four were considered context-specific, including access to case-households, delayed response activation, lack of resources, and low uptake and refusal (S1 Fig). Five categories were identified as recurrent, including lack of resources to initiate, maintain, or scale-up the response (61% of KII, 11 out of 18 published interventions), delays in response activation (44%, 8/18), limited skills and knowledge (44%, 8/ 18), difficult access to case-households (33%, 6/18), and overwhelmed response capacity (33%, 6/18) (Table 3). Less common challenges included low WASH uptake (22%, 4/18), low acceptability and refusal (22%, 4/18), weak coordination (22%, 4/18), poor reporting and monitoring (17%, 3/18), and sustainability issues (11%, 2/18). Although sustainability issues and low acceptance/refusal were less documented in the literature, they were frequently discussed during interviews. Since there were no differences in implementation challenges across delivery mechanisms and less evidence for CATI-like mechanisms, we present the consolidated data in S1 Fig In this, we highlight the different categories (rectangular box), and sub-categories (oval box) of implementation challenges, and contextual features (notched rectangular box), and their relationships.


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.t003
Each of the ten implementation challenge categories are further described below.
Delays in response activation. Political, administrative, logistical, and procedural constraints caused delays. Respondents mentioned that there were delays in response in the North-East Zone in Nigeria and in Mozambique due to political challenges in declaring cholera outbreaks. Additionally, unclear CATI activation triggers (e.g., whether to act once an outbreak is declared, after one confirmed case, or based on RDT results) and differences in disease control objectives (e.g., slowing down of the outbreak, stopping the transmission) between donors, governments, and implementers created coordination challenges, further complicating timely response efforts (from KII). In Mozambique [34] (from KII), Somalia [46] (from KII), and the DRC (from KII), UNICEF-led efforts faced delays due to funding or contractual issues, with response activation one to two months after the outbreak began. Logistical challenges also contributed to delays. Respondents from the DRC, Mozambique, and Somalia noted that a minimum two-week setup period was required for training personnel and organizing responses, particularly in remote or newly affected areas. Furthermore, some response efforts were delayed by procedural constraints that implied mandatory laboratory culture confirmation for each case in Nepal and for each new affected province in an MSF-led study in DRC (from KII). In Nepal, the average time between patient admission and CATI implementation was 3.9 days, with culture results taking approximately 3 days [39]. KIIs helped clarify details about the delays in response activation, especially those linked to funding delays, internal contractual issues, inadequate response triggers and political sensitivities.
“We had to establish the proposal, the contracts, and when the funds reach to the organizations, it took a lot of time to have the resources.” (Mozambique)
“The second point is the delay of the health authorities to declare the cholera outbreak, and you cannot start the activities if they didn’t declare the outbreak.” (Mozambique)
“There’s a bit of confusion on that [CATI activation]. Donors, partners and the government don’t always have the same threshold.” (Nigeria)
Challenges to access case households. This was primarily due to difficulties in locating patient homes, often caused by incomplete or missing addresses [26,30,39,53]. These challenges arose either from insufficient information recorded at cholera treatment facilities or from patients’ reluctance to disclose their location. Difficulties in reaching case homes were also highly context-specific, influenced by factors such as insecurity [18,53], restricted access during the rainy season [16,44], remote locations [44], and travel time in densely populated urban areas [18].
“We have lots of cases where patients don’t want to give their exact address.” (Mozambique)
Lack of resources. This included inadequate funding [16,18,44,53], insufficient human resources [34,36,44,46], stockouts of supplies [18,26,27], and limited access to OCV [27,34,36,39]. Multiple crises triggered limited human resources to respond to cholera outbreaks in Mozambique and Malawi [34,45]. Restricted access to vaccines was due to shortages in the Global OCV stockpile [34,36] and the OCV application mechanism, which does not have a policy for CATI delivery [27,36]. In half of the interviews, respondents cited lack of funding and supply stockouts, underscoring the critical importance of these challenges. Additionally, the resource-intensive nature of CATI was frequently discussed, despite being rarely documented in the literature.
“[The challenges of CATI are that] they are late and insufficient in terms of resources.” (Multi-countries)
Overwhelmed response capacity. This occurred during high caseloads in multiple settings [17,18,26,32,33,39,42], exacerbated by over-reporting of suspected cholera cases due to the low detection capacity [44] and the low case definition specificity [40] in Yemen, Somalia (from KII), and Mozambique (from KII). In the context of high caseloads, additional challenges were noted, including difficulties in covering large ring sizes in Ethiopia [32] (from KII) and Nigeria [26], followed by supply stockouts reported by respondents (from KII).
“The main challenge we had with the CATI response is the nature of the cases that were received at the Cholera Treatment Unit. We felt there was not a proper case definition.” (Somalia)
Lack of skills and knowledge. In Yemen, a lack of expertise and preparedness resulted in a generic WASH response, with untargeted activities aimed at improving water access and solid waste management [38,40]. Response plans were updated only during the second wave and shortly after the peak, when UNICEF and WHO deployed cholera specialists to develop a cholera-specific control strategy, including CATIs [38]. Weak surveillance capacity in Mozambique [34] (from KII) and Somalia (from KII) hindered case detection and data management. In countries that had recently implemented CATIs for the first time such as Somalia and Ethiopia, finding skilled partners in cholera targeted interventions was challenging (from KII). Moreover, a lack of standardization when multiple implementers were involved in UNICEF-supported responses was highlighted [16,44,45,49]. Eventually, in Yemen [33], Mozambique (from KII) and Somalia (from KII), the absence of an evidence-based, integrated strategy created a disconnect between CATIs and other control activities with geolocation of case-households and case investigation being underutilized. Concerns about disengagement from cholera control interventions beyond CATIs such as Risk Communication and Community Engagement (RCCE), emergency water supply, and water quality intervention and monitoring were raised in six interviews (from KII). In all five countries where key informant interviews were conducted, a lack of skills and knowledge among implementers was identified as a challenge in CATI implementation. Several respondents also highlighted the nonspecific and incomplete nature of the cholera response, emphasizing the risk of diverting resources and efforts exclusively toward CATI. This concern was raised in nearly half of the interviews but was rarely discussed in the peer-reviewed or gray literature.
“This part of investigating, analyzing and understanding epidemic dynamics, which is very weak. We have a lot of data, but nobody’s looking at it.” (Mozambique)
“They [stakeholders] were looking at us like kind of magic bullet. Now [that] CATI is implemented, everything will be okay. So, they kind of stopped other interventions.” (Ethiopia)
“I think there are mandatory actions to any [cholera] response and that allow to improve the impact of CATI is going to be the chlorination of everything that can be chlorinated”. (Multi-countries)
Low WASH uptake. This was reported during MSF-led CATI responses in the DRC [31] (from KII) and Ethiopia [32] (from KII), as well as during an MSF-led HBI intervention in the DRC [22]. It was also noted in formative research for the design of CHOBI-7 in Bangladesh [50] and PICHA-7 in the DRC [24]. Contributing factors included households lacking sufficient water for handwashing, repurposing supplies for other needs (e.g., washing clothes), and concerns about over-chlorination and taste.
“There was no water for hand-washing. Even for drinking, there was no water”. (Ethiopia)
“We didn’t check any kind of free residual chlorine […]. Some people, they were kind of like complaining [of the taste of the water]”. (Ethiopia)”
Low acceptance and refusal. Low acceptance of interventions was driven by community mistrust [26,43,44,53] and [44]. Refusals were reported in Nigeria and DRC when no male household members were present [26,43], in Nigeria [26] and Somalia (from KII) due to lack of supplies, and in Mozambique (from KII) and DRC [53] where fear of stigmatization arose from the visibility of household spraying teams. Low acceptance and refusal of CATI were discussed in two-thirds of the interviews and reported across all five countries, although this issue was less frequently reported in the narrative review.
“They believe this is brought from […] foreigners or someone who come from outside who brought cholera with the [chlorine] powder”. (Mozambique)
“There are some houses that the religion or their culture do not permit for men to come into the compound […] and most of the chlorinators were men”. (Nigeria)
Weak coordination. A lack of agreement with surveillance teams led to delays in CATI teams accessing patient's location information in various settings [19,30,34]. Similarly, insufficient coordination between the Health and WASH sectors led to the creation of parallel “Health” and “WASH” rapid response teams in Haiti, Yemen [33,38], and Nigeria. Additionally, in nearly all WASH-led CATIs (86%, 12/14), there was an absence of medical interventions, such as chemoprophylaxis and OCV [30].
“If we don’t have access to data every day on cases and their addresses, we can’t respond. That’s an insurmountable first limit.” (Multi-country)
Poor reporting and monitoring. Insufficient skills and constrained human resources were identified as major barriers to effective CATI reporting, monitoring, and subsequent data analysis (from KIIs). Partners’ limited access to the Kobo database, a digital tool commonly used to report CATI activities and monitor implementation, made it difficult to use reporting or monitoring results to guide other control activities or adjust the ongoing response. This challenge was not well documented in the literature but was mentioned in nearly one-third of interviews (27%).
“The partners barely have access to the Kobo thing. They don’t really have the capacity to analyse the results. I end up with a huge database and I don’t really know what to do with it.” (Mozambique)
Sustainability issues. Lack of sustainability was observed in multiple responses [30,44], which faced challenges such as high operational costs (from KII) and low government ownership [30]. Additionally, the Ministry of Health in Mozambique (in certain provinces) and Ethiopia expressed concerns that paying incentives to volunteers would disrupt the community health network approach (from KII). This was frequently discussed during interviews but was rarely mentioned in the literature.
“I feel that they see CATI as something that UNICEF and other partners are bringing to them [Ministry of health]. It seems like something that’s coming from outside. It’s not their work.” (Mozambique)
“We are living in a low-income country. We cannot just sustain such incentives […] at a government level. […] Providing incentive for community […] may disturb even the community health systems.”
The results are presented in two parts: the first one describes the CATI-like mechanisms that emerged in response to challenging contexts, while the second one focuses on adaptations made to enhance intervention delivery.
Limitations associated with CATI implementation included reduced coverage during high caseloads [26], resource-intensive nature of the delivery mode [8], high costs [30,47], and challenges in reaching hard-to-reach areas [47]. In response, CATI-like delivery mechanisms were developed for challenging contexts, including pre-CATI, case-cluster, and HBI.
The pre-CATI approach was developed in DRC in remote and conflict-affected areas to reduce response delays by training and equipping Red Cross volunteers in the community (from KII). When the number of cases exceeds the response capacity of pre-CATI teams, mobile CATI teams provide additional support. However, limitations included the absence of medical activities and restricted mobility outside the headquarters area. The effectiveness of pre-CATIs has yet to be evaluated.
Three respondents described the “CATI light” concept in Mozambique, where mobile teams targeted case-households only (no ring intervention) during high caseloads due to restricted funding and limited number of implementers, paired with neighborhood-level RCCE, hygiene promotion, and distribution of POUWT (from KII).
The case-cluster approach in Guinea and DRC was also developed in the context of high case-load in densely populated urban settings where regular CATI implementation would result in overlapping rings in clusters and duplication of activity, likely limiting the number of cases responded to due to resource constraints [19,20]. The grid approach has been reported as logistically complex to implement and resource-intensive (from KII).
HBIs have shown promise in endemic and insecure environments with remote interventions from the health facility [23,25,52]. This approach involved challenges with delayed kit distribution upon patient discharge in Mozambique (from KII) and MSF-led responses in Haiti [21] and DRC [52] as well as issues with water scarcity in Ethiopia [32] and DRC [24,52]. The CHOBI-7 program has led to a reduction in diarrheal prevalence [23] and sustained WASH behavior change in case-households in an endemic urban slum in Bangladesh [25]. In a hygiene kit distribution project in DRC, household contacts who used kits experienced a 66% reduced incidence [22].
“In our context […] endemic to cholera […] and of war and conflicts, we have used Pre-CATI teams […] to access the area during the very first notification. We provide them with resources, logistical resources, materials, inputs.” (DRC)
“We use CATIs to be able to respond when there were very few cases. But in the event of an increase in the number of cases, we have this approach, this second community-based approach, which is the grid approach.” (DRC)
We identified 10 different areas where adaptations or recommendations were made to improve intervention delivery for CATI and CATI-like mechanisms: early detection, readiness and activation, case prioritization, ring-size adjustments, resource optimization, OCV integration, intervention uptake and acceptance, knowledge and capacity strengthening, regular reporting and monitoring, and enhanced sustainability. Below, we synthesize the results by areas of improvement.
Early detection. Linking community-based surveillance networks with CATI teams and training healthcare workers in cholera diagnosis and the use of rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) was recommended to increase response promptness [39,54].
“It is better if cases are identified in the community by the surveillance team and are linked to CATI teams for quick response, rather than waiting for patients to come to treatment facility.” (Ethiopia)
Readiness and activation. Several CATI researchers suggested aligning CATI activation triggers with cholera case definitions from the Global Task Force on Cholera Control (GTFCC) in national cholera plans before outbreaks [30,31,54]. In May 2024, the Health and WASH sectors in North-East Nigeria agreed to use the GTFCC’s newly defined probable case definition to deploy CATI teams [55] (from KII). To improve readiness in various settings, recommendations included prepositioning of response supplies [19,30,33,43], securing early funding [20,26,33], collaborating with local authorities [31], and establishing contingency contracts with CATI implementers, especially in UNICEF-funded responses [34,42] (from KII). Promptly sharing or giving access to patient’s details [33] could be facilitated through prearranged data-sharing agreements (from KII), especially when the WASH sector leads the CATI response [55].
Case prioritization. In documented experiences, response prioritization involved selecting areas based on various factors, including higher reported incidence, severe dehydration levels, an elevated case-fatality ratio, and a greater number of community deaths. CATI implementers also selected areas outside vaccinated zones in South-Sudan [36] and focused on responding only to cases identified using enriched RDTs in the DRC (from KII). In Yemen, where RDTs were unavailable, the targeting of case clusters —such as 20 cases within three days in a single village—were used to increase specificity [33]. Prioritizing alerts for severe outbreaks in Haiti with a red-yellow-green alert system [16] and equipping healthcare workers with enriched and point-of-care RDTs in other contexts [31,36,39,54] were further recommended to optimize responses.
“CATI is pretty resource intensive. If you trigger it for simple diarrhea, all the time, you lose resources pretty quickly, anyway.” (DRC)
Ring-size adjustments. CATI ring sizes varied between published recommendations (100–500 meters) [7–9] and real-world responses, as seen in Ethiopia [32] (from KII), North-East Nigeria [26], and MSF-led CATIs in the DRC [31]. Balancing coverage of more case households and neighbors required adjusting ring sizes based on context, considering factors such as population density, resources and geography [26,31,32]. Smaller rings were preferred in urban areas, especially during high case numbers, while rural areas allowed for more flexibility. In Ethiopia, ring sizes grew larger as cases declined [32] (from KII). The inability to delimit a ring in meters was identified as a challenge by CATI implementers [26]. However, the use of mapping technology, such as Mergin (London, United Kingdom), in the MSF-led operational research in the DRC helped the team cover a defined radius and identify overlapping zones (from KII).
“Since there were many cases coming per day, we had to decrease the number of households we have to include in CATI. After a while, we again increased this number of households.” (Ethiopia)
Resource optimization. During the 2023 cholera outbreak in Adamawa State, Nigeria, resource optimization was achieved by recruiting community volunteers to reduce transport costs and partnering with national NGOs to pool human resources, thereby reducing overhead expenses (from KII). Integrating CATI teams across sectors and pillars helped to minimize duplication and maximize resource efficiency [30]. In Haiti, the collaboration between WASH NGOs and nurses from the Ministry of Health facilitated the administration of targeted antibiotic prophylaxis to case-household members. Distributing cholera kits directly via cholera treatment centers, cholera treatment units, oral rehydration points, or community health workers reduced operational costs, such as car rentals, minimized delays in kit utilization, and improved coverage in hard-to-reach areas [8,21,47,54]. Additionally, mobile health components in the CHOBI-7 program in Bangladesh minimized the need for physical home visits, enhancing operational efficiency [48]. Mobile messages in both the CHOBI-7 and PICHA-7 programs as well as those recommended in the UNICEF-led response in the DRC [44] helped reinforce proper WASH behaviors. Distributing disinfection materials can boost self-efficacy and promote early, repeated home disinfection during the one week high-risk period [47], while evaluating behavior change beyond this period can improve program effectiveness [22]. In Nigeria, the distribution of standard cholera kits to neighboring households within CATI rings was impossible due to resource constraints, prompting discussions on a low-cost cholera kit within UNICEF’s common pipeline (from KII).
Intervention uptake and acceptance. Low acceptance and refusal was addressed by engaging community health workers [8], community leaders [32], and local stakeholders to reduce stigma and increase trust [26,34,44]. Community volunteers and leaders integrated into CATI teams played a key role in facilitating access to case households in Red Cross-led responses in the DRC [30] (from KII) and Ministry of Health-led responses in Ethiopia [32] (from KII). Using survey results, formative research in Bangladesh [48] and the DRC [24], and rapid participatory assessments [43] were effective in adjusting responses and identifying high-acceptance kits. Contextualizing WASH interventions based on local norms, preferences [31,52], and building rapport with households can further improve program acceptance.
“Often, we have teams that are really vertical. They go in, hand over the kit, throw out four messages and leave. An SBC [Social Behavior Change] specialist was really good to empower the teams in this interactive approach.” (multi-countries)
Knowledge and capacity strengthening. This would require deploying experienced cholera specialists to develop and roll out CATI and CATI-like strategies, particularly in contexts with no previous CATIs experience [38]. Formulating clear, context-adapted standard operating procedures that address specific and recurrent challenges, along with training staff [18,26,38] were suggested to ensure standardization across implementers before the cholera season [31,39,44].
“One CATI experience does not fit all. It must be contextualized and flexible.” (DRC)
Regular reporting and monitoring. Weekly reporting of CATI implementation with standardized indicators in UNICEF-funded CATI response, such as the percentage of reported cases responded to within 24–72 hours [30,34], improved the timeliness and coverage of CATI responses in Haiti [30]. Monitoring, including surveys to adjust intervention design, was used in Haiti’s household disinfection kit project [21] and recommended in Nigeria [26]. The need for qualitative and systematic post intervention monitoring was consistently highlighted as a priority in interviews with UNICEF advisors and implementing partners.
Enhanced sustainability. This was achieved in some UNICEF-led responses by integrating CATIs into the national cholera control plan [33,39] and strengthening and supporting existing disease outbreak response systems [18], such as the municipality rapid response teams in Zimbabwe [42] and contact tracing teams in Mozambique (from KII).
“Instead of systematically trying to create a whole team through an NGO, we can support this existing system and complement it.” (Mozambique)
We identified four types of CATI and CATI-like mechanisms implemented in 15 countries, across diverse geographical contexts and outbreak settings. Our analysis revealed 10 categories of implementation challenges and 10 areas of adaptations to improve response delivery. The CATI model, in which mobile teams intervene at case households and surrounding rings, was found to be less suitable in remote locations (due to deployment time), conflict zones (due to restricted access), during high caseloads (due to resource demands and response duplication), and sometimes in areas with community mistrust. Considering context-specific CATI-like mechanisms and adapting intervention delivery to address implementation challenges could help improve response effectiveness by reducing intervention delays, increasing case and ring coverage, enhancing acceptance and WASH behaviors, improving cost efficiency, and ultimately decreasing cholera incidence. Pre-CATI can be particularly valuable in remote or conflict-affected areas, where locally integrated Red Cross volunteers or community health workers can respond quickly. The case-cluster approach helps avoid duplication of activities and enables targeted, tailored interventions in persistent case clusters, while used in combination with CATI for case-households outside of these areas. Interventions from cholera treatment facilities provide a cost-effective alternative or a complementary solution to CATIs to reach case households when mobile teams can not access an area, during high caseloads when resources are limited, or in endemic settings with a steady but relatively low number of daily cases. We summarized our findings into two implementation frameworks for CATI and CATI-like mechanisms, detailing objectives, contextual applications, challenges, adaptations, response phases, and anticipated improvements in effectiveness (S2 and S3 Figs).
There is limited knowledge and understanding among practitioners regarding CATI-like mechanisms and how they can be used independently or combined with CATI. For example, integrating CATI with household disinfection kit distribution—in which mobile teams deliver disinfection supplies, such as bleach together with infographics on instructions for use —could enhance case-household self-efficacy and facilitate early and repeated disinfection, rather than relying solely on one-time interventions by CATI teams [47]. Additionally, the mobile health components of the PICHA-7 and CHOBI-7 programs could be used during CATIs or case-cluster interventions to enhance behavior change [24,50]. We and CATI-like mechanisms in overstretched response contexts, particularly when CATI teams are unable to meet their pre-agreed objectives for case coverage or response time. Case-households that cannot be reached by CATI teams can be addressed at health facilities through HBI. This approach is also applicable in situations where resistance, conflict, or stigmatization hinders the access or acceptance of mobile response teams within the community. In densely populated urban areas with high case-loads and overwhelmed response capacity, we recommend to adopt a case-cluster or a grid approach rather than CATI, through georeferencing and tailored interventions at the community and case-household level. Practitioners should be equipped with the skills and knowledge to implement these shifts effectively. Current guidelines primarily focus on CATI delivery, while neglecting CATI-like mechanisms and the critical processes of reviewing implementation challenges and adapting CATI delivery before and during outbreaks. To address this gap, specific guidelines, processes, training materials, and tools should be developed based on the proposed framework (S2 and S3 Figs). These resources would provide practical support for teams struggling to meet performance objectives during a cholera response and could play a valuable role during preparedness and readiness phases. Furthermore, evidence is lacking regarding the key performance indicators and thresholds to use, particularly when to shift or combine delivery mechanisms. Further discussion and consensus with specialists are needed.
Our analysis of CATIs and CATI-like mechanisms revealed that few responses were initiated at the onset of outbreaks, despite the critical importance of timely intervention. Risk modeling studies [7,55] and a quasi-experimental analysis of CATI implementation in Haiti [17] demonstrate that rapid responses can significantly reduce both the number of cases and the duration of an epidemic. These findings underscore the need for readiness efforts in Priority Areas for Multi-sectoral Interventions (PAMIs), as well as the anticipation of challenges and necessary adaptations during CATI implementation. In conflict-affected or hard-to-reach PAMIs, the timeliness of outbreak response can be enhanced by establishing pre-CATI and engaging, training and equipping national NGOs and/or community-based volunteer networks, and/or district-level intersectoral rapid response teams from the government before the cholera season.
Integration of CATI and CATI-like mechanisms into national plans has enhanced government ownership of these strategies in Haiti, the DRC, and North-East Nigeria, where they have been implemented for several years. While the integration between the WASH and Health sectors improved in Haiti from 2010 to 2018 [16], it did not result in a more sustainable response capacity within the Haitian government or deeper integration into the Ministry of Health’s disease outbreak response mechanisms. This can partly be explained by the deterioration of the security context and the emigration of skilled professionals since 2019 [56]. Furthermore, our review found that when WASH partners lead the response, critical surveillance and medical activities—such as case investigation, ACP, and OCV—were less likely to be carried out. Leveraging existing outbreak response systems could provide additional benefits such as sustainability and ownership and enhance the impact of interventions through stronger intersectoral collaboration.
This study provides valuable insights into the implementation of CATIs in under documented countries such as Somalia, Ethiopia and Mozambique. We introduce and document the “CATI light” concept in Mozambique and the pre-CATI mechanism in DRC. We categorized CATI and CATI-like mechanisms during cholera outbreaks and illustrate the potential of those approaches across diverse contexts. As this study covers diverse geographic contexts and outbreak settings across 15 countries, these findings may be broadly applicable.
Some study limitations should be noted. While the narrative review involved a systematic approach, it did not follow the comprehensive scope of a full systematic review. Indeed, screening, quality/bias assessment, and data extraction was carried out by a single reviewer, which may increase the risk of missing key publications unintentionally. Furthermore, this study relied on MEDLINE and EMBASE as the primary databases for the literature review. An initial scoping search, along with findings from two previous reviews conducted by JHU and LSHTM, confirmed that the majority of relevant literature on CATI and CATI-like experiences was indexed in these two databases. However, the exclusion of other databases may have limited the capture of regionally published studies. Restricting the review to only English and French language publications may inadvertently limit the extent of the review, excluding potentially relevant publications in Portuguese, Arabic and other languages. A single interviewer was responsible for KIIs over a short timeframe, thus restricting KIIs to five African countries. As a result, countries with notable experience in CATIs, such as Haiti and Bangladesh, and other countries with gaps in CATI research, such as Comoros, Mayotte, Malawi, Lebanon and Syria were excluded from KIIs. Key informants were identified through a snowball approach. While some informants may have previously been colleagues of the study team, given the niche nature of the topic, the sampling strategy prioritized individuals and organizations directly involved in CATI implementation to ensure the collection of relevant and context-specific insights. Data-sharing issues between surveillance or medical teams and CATI implementers were not frequently reported during interviews, possibly due to recall bias, as access to health data typically improves over time. Ultimately, the narrative review and KII did not capture the interventions conducted by the Ministry of Health’s rapid response team at the district level during cholera outbreaks. Due to limited documentation, future research could explore how these interventions align with or complement CATI and CATI-like mechanisms.
This study offers a classification of CATI and CATI-like mechanisms, alongside a comprehensive mapping and categorization of implementation challenges and adaptations to intervention delivery. We recommend that the proposed implementation frameworks and associated findings be reviewed and discussed by subject-matter experts at the global level. Such engagement could support broader dissemination and practical uptake by field practitioners, and inform the development of an operational guideline on CATI and CATI-like mechanisms.
Future studies should evaluate the effectiveness of pre-CATI, case-cluster, CHOBI-7 and PICHA-7 approaches during cholera outbreaks. Additionally, assessment of the cost-effectiveness of various delivery mechanisms, whether used independently or in combination, may guide resource allocation. CATI and CATI-like mechanisms primarily aim to reduce household transmission and often address environmental transmission through improved access to safe water, though they rarely encompass all contexts of transmission. Therefore, they should be integrated into a multi-sectoral and comprehensive cholera control strategy, informed by epidemiological data, case investigation findings, socio-cultural drivers, and WASH assessments. This strategy should also promote complementary interventions such as RCCE, emergency water supply, water quality measures, and ongoing monitoring. While CATI is not a magic bullet, it serves as the cornerstone of an evidence-based and targeted response.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.s001
(TIF)
The color-coding system is as follows: red for CATI, orange for pre-CATI, yellow for case-cluster, and green for HBI delivery mechanisms. Adaptive strategies are divided into (1) adaptations to the existing delivery mechanism (blue rectangles) and (2) suggestions to shift or combine with other delivery mechanisms (color rectangles). The figure was created using Wikipedia Commons (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Accueil).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.s002
(TIF)
The color-coding system is as follows: red for CATI, orange for pre-CATI, yellow for case-cluster, and green for HBI delivery mechanisms. Adaptive strategies are divided into (1) adaptations to the existing delivery mechanism (blue rectangles) and (2) suggestions to shift or combine with other delivery mechanisms (color rectangles).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.s003
(TIF)
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.s004
(XLSX)
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.s005
(XLSX)
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.s006
(DOCX)
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0013534.s007
(DOCX)
For more information about PLOS Subject Areas, click
        here.
Is the Subject Area ""Cholera"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Sanitation"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Cholera vaccines"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Haiti"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Epidemiology"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Disinfection"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Mozambique"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Water resources"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.


PLOS is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) corporation, #C2354500, based in California, US "
4,2025-09-23,"Germany’s Autentic Distribution is to shop 80 hours of new factual content at next month’s Mipcom, with the slate spanning current affairs, historical, wildlife and science programming.
Mirjam Strasser
Current affairs content includes Still They Rise – Afghan Women Under the Taliban, a NZZ production about women pursuing education and work despite the regime’s restrictions, business doc Game Over: The Fall of Credit Suisse (Contrast Film), Surviving Globalism (Spiegel TV), and Cold War in Paradise – The Pacific Power Struggle (Berlin Producers).
Historical docs to be offered to buyers include Independence Dawn – The Forgotten Revolution (Go Button Media with Autentic Studios), which marks the 250th anniversary of the US Declaration of Independence, war doc Between Hitler and Stalin: Europe’s Darkest Years (Vincent Productions), The Jungle Hospital – The Myth of Albert and Helene Schweitzer (SMP Signed Media), Archaeological Treasures of Nigeria (SMP Signed Media), Antonio Salieri: Mastermind of Music (Clever Content, Autentic Studios), and Police Women: The Fight for Equality (Zeitsprung Pictures).
In Lifestyle, Autentic will offer My Holy Car – An Obsession Made in Germany (Hoferichter & Jacobs), about Germany’s enduring love affair with the automobile.
Nature and wildlife content includes Penguin Baywatch (Terra Mater Studios & Saint Thomas Productions), Riddle in the Wind (Terra Mater Studios, Saint Thomas Productions), American Amazon (Terra Mater Studios, Grizzly Creek Films) Shells – Within a Sheltered Spiral (Terra Mater Studios, Rooted Media), Same Same – But Different (Terra Mater Studios, Getty Images), Oslo – The Wild Heart of Norway (Terra Mater Studios, Story Surge Films, Earthmedia Film) and Doñana – Spain’s Garden of Eden (Terra Mater Studios, Wanda Films, Wanda Visión, Ukbar Filmes).
The slate continues with Tattoos: Enigma of the South Pacific (UFA Documentary) Oman – Jewel of Arabia (Vincent Productions), Inside Pakistan (Vincent Productions), Wild Galápagos: Life on the Islands (doc.station), Uncovering Taiwan (Berlin Producers Media) Portugal’s Nature Parks II (Kinescope), Exploring Europe by Night Train (Molle & Korn, JYOTI Film) and Bear with Me (Agitprop, Autentic Studios).
Finally, science and technology docs comprise Electric Skies: The Mystery of Lightning (Autentic Studios, NHK), Mind Matters: Inside Your Brain’s Top 5 Secrets and Body Code: Unlocking the Top 5 Body Mysteries (Autentic Studios, ProducersRoom, Getty Images), Life and Love with AI (NZZ) and Climate Engineering – The Reality of Carbon Removal (NZZ)
Mirjam Strasser, head of sales and distribution, Autentic, said: “Our Fall/Winter line-up for Mipcom 2025 captures the diversity of today’s factual storytelling, from pressing global debates and new perspectives on history to intimate cultural portraits and powerful stories about the natural world.”"
5,2025-09-23,"The World Health Organization estimates that as many as 38% of health-care workers suffer some form of physical violence, perpetrated mostly by patients and visitors, at some point in their careers. This harms not only the workers, but also the health of the populations they serve.
 PORT HARCOURT – This summer, a male patient at Specialist Hospital Damaturu in Nigeria’s Yobe State physically assaulted a female health-care worker following a dispute over the provision of medical attention. Sadly, this is a relatively common experience for health-care workers in Nigeria, especially women. Surveys conducted in hospitals in Kaduna state and Abia state found that 64% and 88% of health workers, respectively, had experienced workplace violence. During my own first year of clinical practice in Nigeria, when I was just 24 years old, I was attacked by a parent in the children’s ward where I worked. 
 Nigeria is not alone. Reports of violence against health-care workers have been on the rise over the last five years in a wide range of countries, including Australia, China, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Poland, Slovakia, Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. A 2019 study showed that 11% of nurses in Italy had endured physical violence at work in the previous year, and 4% were threatened with a firearm. About half of all nurses reported experiencing verbal aggression. 
 Such reporting tells only part of the story. The belief that violence is “part of the job,” together with the lack of protocols for handling attacks and the empathy of many in the health-care field, discourages reporting. When I was attacked in 2004 – narrowly avoiding a severe head injury, thanks only to the swift intervention of another patient’s relative – I eschewed legal prosecution out of sympathy for the perpetrator’s family, which was, after all, grappling with a child’s illness and subsequent death. It is likely that fewer than half of all victims of violence in health-care settings report the incidents. 
 With this in mind, the World Health Organization estimates that as many as 38% of health-care workers suffer some form of physical violence, perpetrated mostly by patients and visitors, at some point in their careers. This figure does not cover the verbal threats and intimidation many workers face as they carry out life-saving work, often under high-stress, low-resource conditions. 
 Several factors contribute to the violence. Health-care workers are often younger women. They must work both day and night shifts in environments that are accessible to the general public, including people who have consumed drugs or alcohol, and people suffering from psychiatric illnesses. Moreover, staff and resource shortages mean that health-care workers are often overworked, underpaid, and lack access to the tools they need to deliver quality or timely care. Long wait times increase stress and frustration among patients (and their relatives), who often expect miracles, even when they present late for treatment. Add to that poor communication and weak workplace protections, and violence becomes a constant peril. 
 Risks to health-care workers are particularly acute in disaster, conflict, and other humanitarian settings, where they may also become the targets of political or communal violence. During the COVID-19 pandemic, social isolation, misinformation about the virus, and the “dehumanization” of health-care workers – who were often viewed as resources, not people – contributed to a sharp uptick in violence. 
Catch up on the discussions from our Climate Week NYC event. Watch global leaders and experts weigh in on the future of multilateralism, the new development economics, and the most effective levers of change.

WATCH NOW

 As a result of these experiences, health-care workers often deal with anxiety, depression, job burnout, post-traumatic stress disorder, and other mental-health conditions. One study found that some 76% of psychiatric nurses who suffered from workplace violence subsequently experienced depressive symptoms. 
 As health workers’ well-being declines, so does the care that patients receive. Increased absenteeism and turnover compound the problem, especially as fewer people choose to enter the health-care field. At a time when the world is facing a shortage of health-care workers – projected to reach ten million by 2030 – this poses a direct threat to public health. 
 Protecting health-care workers will require a variety of interventions. For starters, violence prevention and response should be integrated into workers’ education and training. They should be taught communication strategies for de-escalating tense situations, and self-defense techniques to use if violence erupts. Team-based training can strengthen coordinated responses, enabling other workers to intervene when their colleagues are targeted. 
 Furthermore, the scope and enforcement of existing worker-protection laws must be enhanced. Institutions must implement zero-tolerance guidelines, with clear protocols for monitoring workplace safety, reporting and investigating incidents, and bringing legal action against offenders. The swift arrest and prosecution of perpetrators – as seen after the recent attack at Specialist Hospital Damaturu – can act as a deterrent. Hiring trained security personnel would also help, as would the implementation of reliable communication systems that enable workers to sound the alarm when their safety is threatened. 
 Meanwhile, a concerted effort must be made to address health-worker shortages, such as through task-shifting or -sharing – the partial or complete redistribution of certain responsibilities to less qualified personnel, so that highly qualified workers can focus on tasks that require their expertise. Already, this approach has improved service delivery in a number of areas – including HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, hypertension, diabetes, mental health, eyecare, maternal and child health, sexual and reproductive health, and emergency care – in 23 Sub-Saharan African countries. 
 All people have a right to safety in their workplace. When we fail to uphold this right for health-care workers, we hurt not only them, but also the health of the public they serve. 

Take Survey


Sep 16, 2025
Nirupama Rao


Sep 17, 2025
Daniel Innerarity & Fabrizio Tassinari


Sep 17, 2025
Nina L. Khrushcheva


Sep 17, 2025
Curtis J. Milhaupt & Angela Huyue Zhang


Sep 19, 2025
Lee Jong-Wha


                                 Writing for PS since 2025 
1 Commentary

Adaeze Oreh is Commissioner for Health in Rivers State, Nigeria, a Kofi Annan Global Health Leadership fellow, and an Aspen Global Innovators senior fellow.
Before posting a comment, please confirm your account. To receive another confirmation email, please click here.


                            It appears that you have not yet updated your first and last name. If you would like to update your name, please do so here.
                        
After posting your comment, you’ll have a ten-minute window to make any edits. Please note that we moderate comments to ensure the conversation remains topically relevant. We appreciate well-informed comments and welcome your criticism and insight. Please be civil and avoid name-calling and ad hominem remarks.




Your name




Your email




Friend's name




Friend's email




Message








First Name




Last Name




Email




Please provide more details about your request







We hope you're enjoying our PS content


Subscribe

To have unlimited access to our content including in-depth commentaries, book reviews, exclusive interviews, PS OnPoint and PS The Big Picture, please subscribe
In our fast-changing physical world, complacency in the face of climate risks could be catastrophically wrong. The 2008 global financial crisis showed that financial markets and regulators are perfectly capable of neglecting major threats, only this time there will be no one on the winning side of a short bet.
At this year's United Nations General Assembly, the international community must recognize its collective responsibility to end the spiral of violence in the Middle East. This is the moment to start generating positive dynamics in favor of the only viable solution: an Israeli and Palestinian state, side by side.
Support Project Syndicate

Subscribe
Upgrade
Donate


Get our weekly newsletter









Make your inbox smarter.

            Select Newsletters
        













Please log in or register to continue. Registration is free.

Email
required



Password
required


Remember me?



                                    Please enter your email address and click on the reset-password button. If your email exists in our system, we'll send you an email with a link to reset your password. Please note that the link will expire twenty-four hours after the email is sent. If you can't find this email, please check your spam folder.
                                




Reset Password
Cancel


Email
required



            By proceeding, you are agreeing to our Terms and Conditions.
        




                                 
                            

                                 
                            
Sign in with

Facebook


 Google


Microsoft


X


Your Institution



To receive email updates regarding this {entity_type}, please enter your email below.    






            If you are not already registered, this will create a PS account for you. You should receive an activation email shortly.
        "
6,2025-09-23,The schedule for the second leg of the first preliminary round in the 2025-2026 CAF Champions League:Pyramids/@cafThe second leg matches of the CAF Champions League first preliminary round kick off to...
7,2025-09-23,"Large, selective colleges enroll the greatest share of international students. But they’re not the institutions feeling enrollment drops so far this fall, early data shows.

By 

                    Ashley Mowreader
                  

You have /5 articles left.Sign up for a free account or log in.
Several institutions reported drops in international student enrollment this fall.
Photo illustration by Justin Morrison/Inside Higher Ed | skynesher/E+/Getty Images
Since taking office in January, President Donald Trump and his administration have sought to limit international students in the U.S. The crackdown has included detaining foreign student activists, stripping students’ SEVIS statuses and visas, implementing social media vetting processes, pausing new visa issuances, and seeking to limit students’ length of stay in the country. 
Those efforts thus far appeared to have spurred a decline in the number of international students able to enroll and enter the country, according to an Inside Higher Ed analysis of fall enrollment data. 
But the federal government has missed its primary target: wealthy, selective colleges and universities, which the administration has accused of denying seats to U.S. students in favor of enrolling higher-paying international students. 
“Sometimes what you have, at an elite university, like a Columbia or a Harvard, you have a well-qualified, middle-class American kid from the heartland, who doesn’t get a spot in these universities because some Chinese oligarch who’s paying $100,000 a year takes up that spot,” Vice President JD Vance told Fox News on March 13. “It’s not just bad for national security, it’s bad for the American dream.” 
International students, particularly at public institutions, typically pay more than their domestic peers in tuition, and this additional revenue can help offset cost of educating low-income or local students who pay less. A majority of the Ivy League institutions offer need-blind admissions to international students which, in essence, would eliminate bias toward a student who would receive more or less institutional aid. 
Advocates for international education have warned these efforts would damage the U.S. at large, reducing revenue to colleges and states, as well as damaging the country’s reputation as a leader in academia. Projections from NAFSA, the association of international educators, estimated that a 15 percent drop in international student enrollment nationwide would result in $7 billion in lost revenue. A more modest estimate of a 10 percent decline would still mean a loss of $3 billion. 
But the restrictions on international student enrollment so far haven’t made a dent at Harvard, where administrators anticipate similar numbers of international students for the fall, The Harvard Crimson reported. Harvard is in the middle of a legal battle with the government over its ability to enroll international students, among other issues. 
Princeton University, similarly, reported a larger share of international students this fall, with 14 percent of the Class of 2029 hailing from other countries. 
Columbia University’s incoming class is 16 percent international students, according to The Columbia Spectator, down from last fall’s 30 percent. International students made up about 20 percent of the total campus population in fall 2024. 
Instead, small, regional and private faith-based institutions that enroll a fraction of the country’s foreign scholars have been feeling the greatest declines, according to preliminary data that the colleges shared. 
An analysis from the Brookings Institution, published in July, found specialized colleges with smaller enrollments were more likely to have high shares of international students, and a majority of these institutions were Christian colleges. 
To NAFSA’s CEO, Fanta Aw, the drop in international students at smaller institutions wasn’t surprising; any enrollment declines hit those with fewer students hardest, she said. Small liberal arts colleges and rural colleges were expected to feel even the slightest change in numbers. 
“The turning point was when the government decided that they were going to pause visa interviews,” Aw said. “That impacts every student, irrespective of what institution we go to. The numbers are reflecting the fact that government policies absolutely impacted every type of institution, well beyond the elite.” 
Colleges will submit final fall enrollment numbers to the Department of Education in October. 

Niagara University in upstate New York is a private, Catholic institution that enrolls about 2,700 undergraduates each year. In fall 2024, the university reported 692 international students were part of the Eagle community, comprising about a quarter of its total enrollment. This fall, only 465 international students will be joining the Eagle family, and that’s across the university’s two campuses and graduate programs, a 45 percent drop in enrollment, The Niagara Gazette reported. 
Visa delays are keeping students from making it to Niagara, Chandra Foote, the university’s associate provost for graduate and international enrollment, told the Gazette. “We had a lot of students we admitted in March, April and May, and they can’t find an open appointment to have an interview.” 
Lee University, a similarly sized Christian school in Tennessee, enrolled 82 international students this past year. Administrators told The Salina Post they’re only expecting 50 or 60 students this fall, a decline as great as 39 percent. The university has already increased tuition 20 percent over the past five years as a way to recoup lost enrollment revenue.
Regional colleges also depend on international student tuition revenue. 
Illinois State University enrolled just over 600 international students, a majority of whom are graduate students. ISU anticipates enrollment to drop over all by about 31 percent this fall and only about 100 new international students in total, according to WGLT. 
Cleveland State University administrators said in May that they expected 579 fewer international students this fall—486 of whom are returning students—which could result in $11.5 million in lost revenue, as reported by Crain’s Cleveland Business. 
Central Michigan University hosted 1,659 international students in fall 2024, typically welcoming between 500 to 600 new students each year, according to a university spokesman. This year, CMU expects 1,210 nondomestic students on campus, a 23 percent drop. 
Even flagship institutions are feeling the effects of fewer international students, in large part because of fewer master’s students, Aw said. 
Given the uncertainty surrounding international student enrollment, it was expected that postgraduate students who are in shorter-term programs would be less likely to apply and enroll for this calendar year. In addition, a majority of master’s students hail from India and China, which were among the countries that saw higher disruptions to visa interview appointments this summer. 
The University of North Texas ranks No. 10 in the country for number of international students enrolled, according to OpenDoors data, hosting 11,900 foreign students in the 2023–24 academic year alone, making up about 23 percent of the university’s total enrollment. 
Even before this fall, UNT reported expected to lose about $47.3 million in anticipated net tuition and fees from slowing international student enrollment in 2024–25. “Fall 2025 international student enrollment currently indicates a similar decline,” according to meeting notes. 
Indiana University, Indianapolis, reported 26 percent fewer international students this fall, enrolling just over 1,000 learners compared to nearly 1,400 in fall 2024. The flagship campus, IU Bloomington, also reported a year-over-year enrollment decline of 11 percent, according to systemwide data. 
The University at Buffalo, part of the State University of New York system, had about 750 fewer international students on campus this far, NPR reported. UB provost A. Scott Weber added in an August message to the campus community that the university saw significant drops in international student enrollment within graduate programs and STEM master’s programs, specifically,
The University of Wisconsin, Madison, is seeing international student applications stall for the first time in over a decade, administrators told The Cap Times. UW Madison hosted 9,500-plus international students in 2023–24, per OpenDoors data; exact numbers for this fall have yet to be shared. 
Editor’s note: Many colleges and universities on the West Coast or on the quarter system have yet to begin classes for the fall term, which is why they’re underrepresented in data reporting.  
A June poll found a majority of Americans disapprove of the Trump administration’s approach to issues of higher education. Regarding international students, 40 percent of respondents indicated that they disapproved of the Trump administration’s decision to monitor international students’ social media accounts, and 80 percent believe the president should not have the authority to determine which colleges and universities can enroll foreign students. 
Nearly three in five respondents support awarding green cards to foreign students who graduate from American universities so they can work in the U.S. after they graduate. 
International scholars say they’re interested in studying in the U.S., despite changing policies from the government and shaky campus climates. The most significant and prevalent barrier to arrival is securing a student visa. 
Recent data from the U.S. International Trade Association reported 28 percent fewer visitors, or about 30,500 students, arrived in the U.S. on a student visa in July 2025 compared to the year prior. In May, the State Department issued 17,000 fewer F-1 and J-1 visas, compared to the same period a year ago. (The State Department has not published more recent data since May.) 
Fewer than half of all incoming international students were able to schedule a visa interview before May, Aw said, which caused a backlog internationally and especially within countries that enroll greater shares of international students, such as China, India and Nigeria. 
Some international students who were previously enrolled or living in the U.S. may have chosen to stay in the country for the summer, reducing the need for them to file for a new visa. But the data signals a decrease in new students over all. 
Many institutions say they’re working with incoming students to find alternate opportunities for them to remain enrolled. The most common solution is allowing students to defer their enrollment to the spring term, which alleviates pressure to get a student visa immediately. 
“The fact that [international students] are willing to defer tells you that the quality really matters in their decision,” Aw said. “They’re cautiously optimistic that perhaps things can change.” 
Central Michigan officials said over 600 international students deferred their enrollment to another semester due to visa complications. Minnesota State University, Mankato, created a new midsemester start option, giving international students a few extra weeks to secure a visa but still arrive before January. 
Other accommodations including enrolling the student at an international campus—Niagara University is placing some students at Salzburg College in Austria, for example—or allowing students to complete classes online. 
Aw anticipates the visa bottleneck to alleviate over the coming months, but she noted that colleges should not anticipate every deferred student to arrive on campus in the spring, as some may choose to study in another nation. 
“If they choose to go to the U.K. or elsewhere and deferred with a U.S. institution, we will lose them,” Aw said. “Once they actually go to another country, the odds of them leaving that to come to a third country are very slim.”
Don’t put research on the back burner: A good project management system can help you work consistently throughout the
Disappointed but not deterred, students from Libya and Myanmar shut out of the U.S.
The proposal would limit international students’ duration of stay to four years.
Learn budget-conscious approaches to amplify your impact without overextending your team.
Subscribe for free to Inside Higher Ed’s newsletters, featuring the latest news, opinion and great new careers in higher education — delivered to your inbox.
View Newsletters
Copyright © 2025 Inside Higher Ed  All rights reserved. | Website designed by nclud

4/5 Articles remainingthis month.
"
8,2025-09-22,"“If you want a state, kill some Jews,” grumbles Spiked’s Brendan O’Neill of UK Prime Minister Keir Starmer’s “recognition of a State of Palestine while Hamas continues to hold half-starved Jews in its dank tunnels.”"
9,2025-09-22,"Business Insider Edition 
This as-told-to essay is based on a conversation with Shalonda Trent. It has been edited for length and clarity.

        My husband, Precious Ubaka Spik, and I often laugh that the very people who were the most opposed to our unconventional, whirlwind romance have become our greatest supporters.
    

        Nearly every member of my American family and community was shocked in 2021 when I started direct messaging Precious, a complete stranger, on Facebook that May. I became engaged in July, met him in Dubai for the first time in November, and got married a week later in his native country, Nigeria.
    

        They were skeptical when I went to live with him in Astana, Kazakhstan, where he taught English to children and adults, as a newlywed, to carve out a life more than 6,000 miles from the US.
    

        Nearly four years later, in April of this year, close relatives, including my mom, dad, and siblings, joined my church family in welcoming Precious to our home city of New Haven, Connecticut.
    

        Gone are the days when they thought he was a scammer — my pastor had warned me about about a love-struck woman being conned by a guy on the internet, which has been replaced by trust and warmth.
    

        Precious, 35, who plays the piano in church, has a green card and has already worked several jobs stateside. Best of all, he's the father of our three beautiful kids: Amaya, 3, Adrian, 2, both born in Kazakhstan, and Ameeyah, born this July in Connecticut.
    

        Precious qualified for his green card 2  years after our wedding, which he was awarded in March 2024. Many people think it has been a long time, and it costs us around $1,500.
    

        It wasn't like in the movies, where both the husband and wife are interviewed separately and questioned about each other's habits. Instead, Precious went alone to the US embassy and consulate in Almaty, Kazakhstan. We saved money by not hiring a lawyer and put together the proof ourselves, such as our joint finances, pictures from the wedding, and supporting letters from the family.
    

        We could have stayed in Kazakhstan, where Precious earned a salary equivalent to $1,300 a month, which went a long way because the cost of living is relatively low. I learned to speak Russian via an app and picked up a few well-paying jobs teaching English and helping an author write a cookery book. We had a luxurious apartment in Astana.
    

        Meanwhile, I met some great friends from the expat community who were in the same position as we were.
    

        However, there were mounting problems with staying abroad.
    

        There isn't much diversity, and since Precious and I are Black, strangers would stop us in the street and ask us to take photographs with them. It often made me feel uncomfortable.
    

        I wanted my children to be surrounded by peers who look like them.
    

        Also, I was homesick and went through a range of negative emotions. It was made worse by being a new mother without an immediate support network from my blood relatives. I'd say to Precious, ""I want to go back to my own country.""
    

        Like many immigrants, he had to start his career again from scratch after we moved. He was employed for around minimum wage at Amazon and Macy's before going into caretaking for older people, which pays $22 an hour. He also works as a security guard and is training for his pistol license to improve his job opportunities. With it, he will be able to earn up to $50 an hour.
    

        I'm juggling being at home with the kids and studying online for an undergraduate degree in psychology. If all goes to plan, I'll graduate in November. My first step is to secure a case manager position in mental health. My ultimate goal is to become a board-certified behavior analyst.
    

        All in all, I'm glad we came back to the US. But I'm not sure whether we'll stay more than five or six years. Precious wants to return to Nigeria and enter politics. I'm supporting him in every way I can.
    

        Our story shows that not everybody you randomly meet on the internet is a catfish. I'm proof that you shouldn't let anyone talk you out of taking risks. You could miss out on the greatest opportunities in life.
    

Do you have a story to share about the unconventional way you met your spouse or living away from the US? Contact this reporter at jridley@businessinsider.com.
    

September 23, 2025 — An earlier version of this story misstated the timeline of the relationship. They've been married for four years, and the husband qualified for a green card 2  years after their wedding.

 Thanks for signing up for our daily insight on the African economy. We bring you daily editor picks from the best Business Insider news content so you can stay updated on the latest topics and conversations on the African market, leaders, careers and lifestyle.  Also join us across all of our other channels - we love to be connected!
 © 2025 africa.businessinsider.com"
10,2025-09-22,"
  Discover a faster, simpler path to publishing in a high-quality journal. PLOS ONE promises fair, rigorous peer review,
  broad scope, and wide readership – a perfect fit for your research every time.
  


     Learn More
    

      Submit Now
    

Click through the PLOS taxonomy to find articles in your field.
For more information about PLOS Subject Areas, click
          here.
        
Loading metrics
Open Access
Peer-reviewed
Research Article

Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Data curation,

    Formal analysis,

    Methodology,

    Software,

    Writing – original draft
  
Affiliation
    Department of Agribusiness and Marketing, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh
  

Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Data curation,

    Methodology,

    Validation,

    Visualization,

    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Department of Agribusiness and Marketing, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh
  

Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Methodology,

    Supervision,

    Validation,

    Visualization,

    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Department of Agricultural Economics, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh
  




        https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9953-4138
      



Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Funding acquisition,

    Supervision,

    Validation,

    Visualization,

    Writing – review & editing
  
 * E-mail: alambau2003@yahoo.com
Affiliation
    Department of Agribusiness and Marketing, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh
  




        https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3412-9438
      



Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Data curation,

    Methodology,

    Validation,

    Visualization,

    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Department of Agroecology, Aarhus University Interdisciplinary Center for Climate Change, Tjele, Denmark
  

Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Data curation,

    Methodology,

    Validation,

    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Bangladesh Agricultural University Research System, Bangladesh Agricultural University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh
  

Roles
    Conceptualization,

    Methodology,

    Validation,

    Visualization,

    Writing – review & editing
  
Affiliation
    Department of Agroecology, Aarhus University Interdisciplinary Center for Climate Change, Tjele, Denmark
  
Food insecurity and agriculture in South Asia, including Bangladesh, pose significant threats to the well-being and livelihoods of its people. Building adaptive capacities and resilient food systems is crucial for sustainable livelihoods. This study employs the Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis II framework to construct a Resilience Capacity Index (RCI) and analyze its relationship with food security using data from the Bangladesh Integrated Household Survey 2018. The study applies Exploratory Factor Analysis and Structural Equation Modeling to examine the impact of key resilience components such as Access to Basic Services, Adaptive Capacity, and Assets on household resilience. The findings reveal that access to basic services, land assets, and farm equipment positively influences households’ resilience capacity. However, the presence of livestock assets has a negative impact, potentially due to market volatility, climate vulnerability, and disease outbreaks. Additionally, adaptive capacity has a positive but insignificant influence on RCI, suggesting that without enhancing economic opportunities, institutional support, and inclusive development strategies, adaptive capacity could not be enough to foster resilience. However, resilient capacity enhances food security metrics such as the Food Consumption Score and Expenditure. These findings underscore the importance of policies that focus on increasing and maintaining access to basic services, promoting sustainable land management practices, and strengthening social safety nets. This study emphasizes the importance of focusing on livestock assets to ensure their sustainability by stabilizing the livestock market, improving veterinary services, and providing subsidies to reduce maintenance costs.
Citation: Tasnim I, Iqbal MA, Begum IA, Alam MJ, Graversgaard M, Sarma PK, et al.  (2025) Household resilience and its role in sustaining food security in rural Bangladesh. PLoS One 20(9):
           e0332868.
        
        https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868
Editor: António Raposo, Lusofona University of Humanities and Technologies: Universidade Lusofona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, PORTUGAL
Received: July 9, 2025; Accepted: September 7, 2025; Published:  September 22, 2025
This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.
Data Availability: The dataset is available at https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:10.7910/DVN/HOMCPT.
Funding: Bangladesh Agricultural Research System (BAURES) (Grant No. 2023/45/BAU).The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing interests:  The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Food consumption is a fundamental human need, and a global concern, characterized by a surplus of food in some regions and scarcity in others. It stands as a cornerstone of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), notably SDG-1 (No Hunger) [1]. Achieving food security, which ensures an end to hunger, is essential for human well-being [2]. According to the World Food Summit, food security entails access to sufficient, safe, and nutritious food [3]. However, food security is a multifaceted issue intertwined with trade, politics, history, health and nutrition [4]. Countries reliant on imports are often vulnerable to fluctuations in the global market, as international trade can directly affect food accessibility and price stability [5,6]. Political instability and conflict can severely disrupt food production and distribution systems, as observed in countries like Somalia and Yemen [7]. Food systems and access continue to be shaped by historical legacies of colonialism and unequal land distribution, particularly in many developing countries [8]. Moreover, malnutrition exacerbates health vulnerabilities, while poor health undermines households’ capacity to produce or procure food, creating a cyclical relationship [9,10]. Achieving food security, therefore, requires nutrition-sensitive systems that go beyond meeting calorie needs to ensure dietary diversity and adequate nutrient intake [11,12]. Food insecurity, on the other hand, refers to limited or uncertain access to adequate and nutritious food, and the inability to obtain food in socially acceptable ways [13]. It represents a complex challenge that affects individuals and communities worldwide.
Many developing countries, including Bangladesh, have recently experienced acute food insecurity. According to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), a collaborative initiative involving governments, non-governmental organizations, UN Agencies, civil society and other relevant actors, approximately 9.14 million individuals, or 20% of the population, are categorized in Phases 3 and 4 [14]. These phases indicate high levels of acute food insecurity in certain parts of Bangladesh. The poorest households in these areas face significant challenges exacerbated by factors such as high inflation, reduced earnings, and frequent climate-related shocks, which contribute to the severity of food insecurity among the population [14].
The frequency and intensity of natural, economic, and political hazards affecting individuals, businesses, economies, and even entire nations are increasing [15–19]. The concept of resilience has thus gained prominence in governmental and research contexts. Initially introduced in ecology literature by Holling [20], resilience has since been studied and applied across various fields, including socioeconomics [21]. Resilience is commonly defined as the capacity to anticipate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from shocks efficiently and effectively [22]. Recent studies have expanded this definition to include the ability to manage persistent risk exposure [23]. In the context of food security analysis, resilience refers to the latent capacity of households to withstand and navigate socioeconomic factors, climate variability, and other shocks [24]. Traditionally viewed as an endpoint, resilience is now understood as a continuous process that can either enhance or diminish response capacities, thereby impacting overall well-being [25].
Resilient food systems are adept at adapting to new conditions while maintaining stable food production and ensuring access for vulnerable populations. They mitigate the impact of shocks and stressors, with social and economic factors playing crucial roles in enhancing resilience. In countries like Bangladesh, where a significant portion of the population relies on agriculture, food insecurity remains a pressing concern. The food system is vulnerable due to its heavy reliance on a few staple crops such as rice, wheat, and maize, and its interconnectedness with the global food supply chain [14,26–28]. Disruptions in one part of the system can lead to cascading effects throughout. Moreover, the lack of agricultural diversity and reliance on intensive monoculture practices increase vulnerability to pests, diseases, and climate shocks. Bangladesh is particularly susceptible to extreme weather events such as heat waves, floods and droughts [29], which can severely impact food production and access [30].
Assessing the resilience of communities and households to shocks and threats is crucial as it allows nations to anticipate and effectively address these challenges. Resilience assessments help policymakers and organisations understand how well a community can rebound from adversity. Food security, with its multifaceted and complex nature, has predominantly been studied through vulnerability assessments. However, the methodologies used in these assessments often lack dynamism, which makes precise predictions of potential shocks and incidents challenging [31–33].
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) developed the Resilience Index Measurement Analysis (RIMA) to quantify resilience [6,34,35]. This method introduces the concept that resilience can be estimated as a latent variable through a two-step procedure involving observable factors, even when resilience itself is not immediately observable [33]. Recent advancements by FAO have enhanced this approach by using structural equation modelling instead of factor analysis to estimate the resilience index. Additionally, more variables have been included as proxies to represent institutional and natural environments [36].
Applying the RIMA-II model in Bangladesh offers a novel, structured econometric approach to measuring household resilience, an aspect largely absent in previous food security studies. Unlike traditional vulnerability assessments that rely on static indicators, RIMA-II conceptualizes resilience as a latent variable, allowing for a more nuanced and dynamic analysis of the factors influencing resilience capacity. While RIMA-II has been applied in various regions, its use in Bangladesh remains limited, with most existing studies focusing on food security determinants [37,38] or coping strategies [39–48] rather than the interactions among resilience components. Furthermore, prior research lacks a comprehensive resilience index beyond traditional vulnerability assessments, limiting its ability to capture the complex interconnections among resilience factors. Thus, this study makes two main contributions. Firstly, it investigates the key determinants shaping the resilience capacity of households, which influence their ability to adapt and recover from adverse conditions. Second, it assesses how resilience capacity translates into improved food security outcomes. By situating this analysis within the broader context of rural livelihoods, the study aims to provide empirical insights into the mechanisms through which resilience serves as a buffer against food insecurity, offering implications for policy interventions aimed at fostering sustainable rural development.
When attempting to understand and enhance resilience, it is crucial to provide necessary resources and techniques to mitigate adverse outcomes, predict and prepare for shocks and stress, eliminate destructive coping mechanisms, and facilitate recovery [49]. Resilience in environmental and socioeconomic systems is demonstrated by responses to negative events and shocks [21], which encompass transformation, adaptation, and absorption responses [50–53]. Resilience, viewed as an intermediate outcome in socioeconomic studies, integrates capacities such as a household’s or community’s ability to cope with shocks [53]. Recent studies have endeavoured to integrate resilience into various development contexts, including food safety [22,54], well-being [55,56], rural development [57–59], and sustainable livelihoods [60–62].
The articles by [32,33] represent early efforts to define and quantify household resilience in the context of food insecurity. These studies focused on the household as the primary unit of analysis, recognising that crucial decisions regarding risk management made at this level, both before and after adverse events impacting food security [33] introduced a resilience index, treated as a latent variable that cannot be directly observed, and employed a two-stage factor analysis approach using measurable variables. Building on this framework [63] applied a similar latent variable model to measure resilience in Northern Bangladesh, highlighting the importance of comprehensively understanding resilience factors across various capacities. Additionally, d’Errico et al. investigated how shocks, particularly conflicts and climate events, influence resilience measurement [24].
Similarly, Ciani et al. aimed to assess household resilience to food insecurity in a changing environment using principal components and multivariate analysis of panel data. Their resilience index indicated that small landowners and agricultural wage workers exhibited lower resilience levels compared to other livelihood groups [64]. Dhraief et al. conducted a cross-sectional survey employing factor analysis and regression models. Their findings highlighted the significant roles of income and food access, adaptive capacity, and social safety nets in enhancing household resilience, as evidenced by their positive correlations with the resilience index [65]. Conversely, asset possession and climate change showed negative associations with household resilience in their study. However, contrasting findings in other studies have indicated that assets can have positive and notable effects [49,66,67].
Rural households generally exhibit less resilient to food shortages compared to urban and peri-urban households [68]. However, during the COVID-19 lockdowns, urban households experienced higher levels of food insecurity than rural households, yet they were more likely to resort to financial and food-compromising coping strategies [48]. Sassi et al. argued that households often turn to less preferred and cheaper food options during times of food insecurity, which can lead to long-term societal impacts and reduced ability to cope [69]. Large family households are particularly vulnerable to food insecurity, often relying on lower-quality meals and support from family or friends [70]. Ownership of assets also plays a crucial role in the resilience of smallholder farmers, with households possessing more assets generally exhibiting greater resilience to food insecurity [66]. Food-secure households typically exhibit higher dietary diversity and rely less on coping mechanisms, benefitting from adaptive and absorptive resilience capacities along with sufficient income [71].
Previous studies have highlighted that household resilience to food insecurity is influenced by factors such as income, assets, social safety nets, and adaptive capacity, with resilience levels varying across different livelihood groups and geographic locations [32,34,72,73]. However, findings on the role of assets remain inconclusive, calling for a more nuanced approach that differentiates asset types to better capture their distinct contributions to resilience. Despite the growing use of resilience measurement frameworks, studies in Bangladesh have yet to adopt a comprehensive approach that captures the interplay between various resilience components. Although prior research has identified the resilience determinants [48,63,74], few studies have specifically examined the suitability of RIMA-II for the Bangladeshi context [75]. Traditional vulnerability assessments often fail to account for critical dimensions such as access to services, adaptive strategies, and the differential roles of asset types as drivers of resilience. This study addresses these gaps by employing RIMA-II to systematically measure resilience as a latent construct, offering a more integrated and nuanced approach compared to earlier methods in rural Bangladesh. A key contribution of this research is the disaggregation of asset components, land, livestock, and farm equipment, to assess their distinct effects on resilience. This disaggregation is essential, as each asset type contributes differently to resilience in rural Bangladesh. Land ownership is vital for food production and long-term economic stability [76–78], while livestock assets, despite their perceived benefits, introduce risks related to market volatility [79–81], disease outbreaks [82–88], and climate vulnerability [89–92]. Farm equipment, on the other hand, plays a key role in mechanization and agricultural efficiency, making it distinct from the other asset categories [93–97]. Treating assets as a single, aggregate variable would overlook these critical differences in how they contribute to or detract from resilience. This approach ensures a more accurate and policy-relevant analysis of household resilience dynamics in Bangladesh. Furthermore, the use of Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) to validate resilience determinants has been rare in prior research, emphasizing the need for this methodological advancement.
By combining RIMA-II with a robust empirical framework, this study advances the understanding of resilience pathways and generates policy-relevant insights for improving food security in Bangladesh.
It is increasingly recognised that one of the most effective ways to reduce or even avert food security crises is to create more resilient livelihoods [24,49]. The Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis (RIMA) was developed within this framework, with pioneering contributions by the FAO [34]. Employing a novel quantitative methodology, RIMA helps explain why and how certain households can withstand shocks and stressors more effectively than others. Resilience, being a multidimensional concept that cannot be directly observed, must be assessed through proxies by focusing on the needs of the most vulnerable groups. The new RIMA-II methodology offers enhanced guidance for successfully planning, implementing, overseeing, and assessing aid. The RIMA II model was employed to identify and study household resilience [36].
The RIMA-II model enables a better understanding of households` circumstances and needs, as well as identifying potential areas for improving future assistance. Access to Basic Services (ABS), Assets (AST), and Adaptive Capacity (AC) are the widely recognised pillars of the Resilience Capacity Index (RCI). Due to the lack of available data on Social Safety Nets (SSNs), our study focuses on the other three pillars. To estimate each pillar, variables were considered based on a literature review, data availability, context analysis, and statistical properties.
ABS refers to the ability to meet households’ basic needs and encompasses the quality, effectiveness, and access to basic services [98]. This study assesses ABS through the following components: floor type (X1), wall type (X2), housing condition (X3), roof type (X4), sanitation type (X5), source of water (X6), cooking fuel type (X7), distance to health facilities from residence (in kilometers) (X8) and distance to the market (in kilometers) (X9).
AC refers to a household’s ability to cope with and adapt to an unfamiliar situation, enabling them to maintain everyday affairs without long-term disruptions [32,36]. It indicates that more adaptive residents can handle adverse situations without reducing their standard of living [49,99]. In this study, this pillar includes the following components: household head`s employment location (X10), household head`s occupation type (X11), savings (X12), household income per month (X13), household head`s education year (X14), and diversified sources of income (X15).
An essential prerequisite for shock response is AST, the second pillar of the RIMA-II model [32]. Assets encompass a household’s income-producing and not-producing assets [98], serving as indicators of the household’s economic circumstances and providing insight into the impact of shocks on households. The proxies used to construct AST include land holding (in decimal) (X16), land value (X17), livestock value (X18), livestock quantity (X19), farm equipment value (X20), farm equipment quantity (X21), and non-agricultural asset value (X22).
The RIMA-II is divided into two sections: a descriptive and a causal analysis [98]. The RCI used to assess households and inform policy, is generated through descriptive analysis. The RCI is constructed in two stages. The first stage, the formative model, employs factor analysis of observable variables to estimate attributes (pillars) of resilience. The second stage, the measurement model, utilizes a Multiple Indicators Multiple Causes (MIMIC) model to calculate the RCI based on these pillars while considering the relationships between RCI and food security indicators. The developmental model links resilience to the pillars, while the measurement model focuses on food security indicators such as the Food Consumption Score (FCS) and Food Expenditure (FX).
Food Consumption Score (FCS) collects household-level data on the diversity and frequency of food groups consumed over seven days. This data is weighted according to the relative nutritional value of each food group. The main food groups and their respective weights are: staples (weight 2), pulses (weight 3), vegetables (weight 1), fruit (weight 1), meat/fish (weight 4), milk (weight 4), sugar (weight 0.5) and oil (weight 0.5). To calculate FCS, the first step is to sum the consumption frequencies of food items within each group. Next, each food group`s total is multiplied by its respective weight [100].
Food Expenditure (FX) refers to the total cost of food obtained, whether purchased or acquired through other means, including both alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages. This calculation also encompasses food expenditures on dining out at venues such as bars, restaurants, food courts, workplace canteens and street vendors [101]. FX is calculated by multiplying the quantity of food consumed over a seven-day period by its unit price, expressed in Bangladeshi Tk (1 US$ = 110 BDT (Bangladesh Bank, 2024).
Based on the literature and the conceptual framework depicted in Fig 1, observable variables are expected to significantly influence latent variables or pillars. Furthermore, these latent variables are expected to have a significant impact on the RCI. Finally, the RCI is expected to significantly influence food security indicators, specifically, FCS and FX. Previous studies [14,15,19,20,25,29,41–43,76–79] have consistently highlighted the substantial influence of various observable variables on latent pillars, the significant impact of latent pillars on RCI, and the consequential effect of RCI on food security. Consequently, this study proposes the following hypotheses:


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868.g001
The observed variables (X1, X2,.. Xn) used in this study were derived from the Bangladesh Integrated Household Survey (BIHS) 2018. This household survey is administered by Data Analysis and Technical Assistance Limited and designed and supervised by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). The BIHS sample is statistically representative of rural Bangladesh, covering the nation`s seven administrative divisions: Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna, Rajshahi, Rangpur, and Sylhet. The survey includes 325 primary sampling units (PSUs) or villages, encompassing a total of 5,604 households in the BIHS dataset. Therefore, this study utilises a cross-sectional dataset of 5,604 households to achieve its research objectives. This dataset serves as the basis for assessing resilience through the pillars of ABS, AC, and AST, and their impact on the RCI and food security indicators.
Twenty-two measurement items were used to construct latent pillars of the RCI, which is presented in Appendix Table 1 in S1 File. Each observable variable was assessed using a five-point summated Likert scale, where respondents rated their conditions (1 = very poor; 2 = poor; 3 = moderate; 4 = rich; 5 = very rich).
The study utilized a quantitative approach. Initially, descriptive statistics were used to summarize and describe the observable variables of the pillars related to the pillars of resilience and food security indicators. This involved calculating measures such as means, standard deviations, and frequency distributions to provide a clear picture of the characteristics of the data. Statistical factorial analyses were employed to test the study’s hypotheses. To assess the factorial validity of the constructs and explore the latent pillars in the data, exploratory factor analysis was performed following [102]. Given the interconnections among latent constructs, we allowed for inter-factor correlation using the maximum likelihood factor extraction method with orthogonal varimax rotation. Subsequently, structural equation modeling (SEM) was exclusively used for descriptive purposes to understand the explanatory power of the pillars and their relationships with the RCI. This approach is a powerful statistical technique that allows researchers to test complex relationships among variables. It was used in this study to examine the linear correlations between the underlying factors (in this case, the pillars) and the latent variable RCI [103].
The formative model, represented by structural Equation (1), links resilience (η) to the pillars (xi). In contrast, the measurement model, represented by Equation (2), is defined by the Food Consumption Score (FCS) and household food expenditure (FX).
The upper portion of the path diagram (Fig 2) illustrates the relationship between the resilience pillars, as measured by error εR, and the disturbance term of the structural estimation. The measuring model is represented by arrows pointing toward the food consumption Score and the food expenditure in the lower half of the structural model. Since the estimated RCI lacks a specific measurement scale, a scale has been proposed with the coefficient of the food consumption loading (˄1) set to 1. This assumption posits that a one standard deviation increase in RCI corresponds to a one standard deviation increase in food intake. This determination also establishes the unit of measurement for the other outcome indicator (˄2), alongside the variance of the two food security indicators, as depicted in Equations (3) and (4):


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868.g002
The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. It utilized publicly available data from the Bangladesh Integrated Household Survey (BIHS), administered by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). The BIHS obtained formal written informed consent from all respondents prior to data collection.
The summary statistics of all the attributes used to construct the resilience pillars are presented in Appendix Table 2 in S1 File. According to the established criteria [102,104], data is considered normal if kurtosis falls between −7 and +7 and the skewness between −2 and +2. However, our results indicate that some attribute values exceed these thresholds, suggesting potential outliers that may be excluded from further analysis.
Cronbach’s alpha assesses with which respondents answer items on a scale or subscale [105]. A Cronbach’s alpha score greater than 0.6 is generally considered reliable with values between 0.6 to 0.8 deemed acceptable [106,107]. The reliability alpha value for the adaptive capacity (AC) pillar significantly exceeded the threshold of 0.70, indicating adequate reliability [105]. The other four pillars also demonstrated reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values greater than 0.60 [106–108].
Following the initial reliability assessment, Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) was employed to explore the latent factor structure. The maximum likelihood method was used to identify components and establish the pattern matrix. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy was 0.778, surpassing the maximum acceptable level of 0.5 [109]. The criteria, which include a significant correlation matrix determinant of 0.009, a KMO value of 0.778, and a significant Bartlett’s Chi-square of χ2 = 26648.163, p = 0.000, confirmed the adequacy of the sample size chosen for the study [110], indicating sufficient intercorrelation for factorial analysis. Initially identifying ten factors, we retained five factors that collectively explained 82.68% of the total variance in the data, exceeding the acceptable threshold of 60% [102]. Table 1 presents the pattern matrix, demonstrating how each numbered questionnaire item loaded precisely (values above 0.50 on a single component) onto its respective factor. Typically, minimum item-factor loadings of 0.3 to 0.4 are recommended [111–113].


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868.t001
Table 1 categorizes items X1(floor type), X2 (wall type), and X3 (housing condition) under factor 1 as ABS, explaining 29.74% of the total variance. Factor 2, labelled AC, includes X10 (household head`s employment location) and X11 (household head`s occupation type), explaining 23.49% of the variance. Factors 3 and 4 are labelled Ld_A and Lv_A, respectively, and explain 11.09% and 10.25% of the variance. They comprise items X16 (land size), X17 (land value), X18 (livestock value), and X19 (livestock quantity). Item X20 (farm equipment value) and X21 (farm equipment quantity) of factor 5 are labelled FE. Although factors Ld_A, Lv_A, and FE collectively represent the single factor named Assets (AST), they are labelled as separate factors based on our country’s perspective. The loadings of the items range from 0.51 to 0.92.
Table 2 presents the correlation matrix of the five factors included in the analysis. ABS shows significant positive correlations with Ld_A (0.042) and FE (0.034) at the 1% significance level, as these factors contribute to higher income levels that enable households to afford better services. ABS also negatively correlates with AC (0.028) and Lv_A (0.026) at the 5% and 10% significance levels, respectively, possibly due to market volatility and health-related concerns affecting livestock income and service accessibility. AC demonstrates a significant positive correlation with Ld_A (0.023) and Lv_A (0.035) at the 10% and 1% significance levels, respectively, but shows an insignificant correlation with FE (0.017). Ld_A shows a significant positive correlation with both Lv_A (0.047) and FE (0.072) at the 1% level. Lv_A and FE correlate significantly at the 5% level (0.030). Despite the correlations observed among factors, there is no evidence of significant multicollinearity, as no correlation coefficient exceeds 0.8 [114–116].


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868.t002
Table 3 presents the findings from the multiple indicators multiple causes (MIMIC) model, which was derived using structural equation modelling. In this case, we consider the broader contextual framework to accurately analyze the 2018 data, which includes ongoing food insecurity, a substantial influx of Rohingya refugees facing acute malnutrition amidst monsoon-related hazards, and deep-rooted structural vulnerabilities such as limited agricultural diversification. These factors influenced both households` potential for resilience and the outcomes observed in our SEM model. Study shows that ABS exhibits a significant coefficient of 0.429, indicating that a well-structured living condition with essential facilities enhances households’ resilience capacity. This finding also indicates that households with better access to essential services are more equipped to cope with food insecurity and recover from shocks. Thus, the study’s findings support hypothesis A: access to basic services significantly influences the resilience capacity index. Our results reveal a positive correlation between ABS and RCI (Table 3), consistent with previous studies [32,36,117,118], which suggest that access to basic services enhances economic opportunities, knowledge, and overall well-being, thereby contributing to greater resilience. In contrast, studies by [53,66,119,120] report a negative association, attributing decreasing service quality as households become poorer in their respective countries. Previous studies have often identified AC as a significant influencing factor [24,65,67,121,117]. However, our findings indicate that AC is a positive but insignificant factor, suggesting that institutional and economic barriers impede the effectiveness of this factor. While education, skill development, access to information, and access to credit are critical components of AC, their impact on resilience is highly dependent on external factors such as labor market conditions and institutional access [122,123]. This discrepancy may be attributed to Bangladesh`s high vulnerability to global changes, significant socio-economic challenges, and limitations in institutional capacity [124–126]. In Bangladesh, people are unable to leverage their adaptive skills for resilience due to a lack of employment opportunities [119,125,127,128]. Moreover, limited access to credit, and financial services may restrict households from transferring their adaptive strategies to long-term stability [43,125,128]. Furthermore, gender-based disparities in access to resources and decision-making power also undermine the significance of AC [54,129–133]. As a result, households in Bangladesh may exhibit lower adaptive capacity compared to those in other developing or developed countries [43,47,134,135]. Thus, our results do not support hypothesis B: adaptive capacity significantly influences the resilience capacity index. The “Resilience Index Measurement and Analysis II” report by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) discusses how adaptive capacity contributes to resilience but notes that its impact may not always be significant in certain contexts [36].


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868.t003
The critical role of assets in resilience capacity has been widely recognised, as they constitute the most significant pillar for the RCI. Similar findings have been reported by other authors, such as [49,66,67,119] in the context of Malian and Ethiopian households, highlighting assets as the most pertinent factor for RCI, which aligns with our study findings. However, this study takes a more granular approach to segregating the assets into three distinct categories; land asset, livestock asset, and farm equipment, to identify their unique contributions to resilience building. This disaggregation is crucial, as each asset type plays a unique role in shaping a household`s ability to withstand and recover from food insecurity shocks. In the context of Bangladesh, only a small proportion of households own all three asset types of assets simultaneously, making it essential to analyse their individual and combined impacts on resilience. Our results demonstrate a significant coefficient of 0.119 for Ld_A and 0.042 for FE, indicating a positive influence on RCI, thereby corroborating hypotheses C and E. Land assets are crucial for resilience building as they provide financial stability and income through agriculture [76–78,136]. Additionally, having farm equipment ensures household mechanization and agricultural efficiency, which boosts farm production and enhances household resilience [93–97]. Since these assets play distinct roles in shaping resilience capacity, it is essential to calculate them separately.
However, Lv_A demonstrates a significant negative value of 0.053 suggesting that it has a significant negative impact on resilience in Bangladesh. Because it has a high mortality rate of livestock due to natural disasters and high disease outbreaks [137,138]. High vulnerability to climate change may, directly and indirectly, affect livestock production systems, resulting in negative asset values [47,89–92,139–142]. Lv_A are influenced by several interrelated factors that exhibit a counterintuitive negative relationship with resilience, such as market volatility, disease outbreaks, high maintenance cost, and climatic vulnerability. During economic downturns or supply chain disruptions, farmers are forced to sell their livestock at lower prices, undermining their financial stability [79–81]. Disease outbreaks, such as foot-and-mouth disease or avian influenza, frequently affect livestock in Bangladesh, resulting in significant economic losses for rural households. Limited access to veterinary care and inadequate disease prevention measures exacerbate this issue [82–88]. Livestock also involves costly sectors such as feeding, healthcare, and shelter, imposing additional financial burdens on households. While land or farm equipment offers long-term productivity gains, livestock requires continuous investment, making it a riskier asset for resilience building. These combined factors suggest that although livestock is traditionally seen as a liquid asset, it needs more infrastructural development to contribute to long-term resilience in the Bangladeshi context. Consequently, Lv_A cannot verify hypothesis D, which suggests that livestock assets positively influence resilience capacity. Our study indicates that RCI positively influences FCS and FX with significant coefficients of 0.778 and 0.688, respectively. That means households with higher resilience are less likely to experience deteriorating food security and are better positioned to maintain or restore food consumption and expenditure [24]. Policymakers should prioritize resilience-building as a core component of food security programming, employing multidimensional frameworks such as RIMA-II in Bangladesh for targeted, long-term strategies. Our results support hypotheses F and G, which concern the impact of resilience on food consumption and expenditure.
These outcomes remain robust across various model specifications. The results presented in Table 4 indicate that the model under consideration exhibits a significant likelihood ratio Chi-square of 1200.82 at the 1% significance level. The first chi-square compares the model against the saturated test, while the second chi-square compares the baseline versus the saturated model. The saturated model demonstrates a perfect fit for the covariance structure. According to Browne et al., the root mean squared error of approximation (RMSEA) indicates an adequate fit with values between 0.05 and 0.08 [143]. A value close to one on both the Tucker-Lewis index (TLI) and the comparative fit index (CFI) denotes a good fit, as suggested by Hair et al. and Bentler [102,144]. The coefficient of determination (CD = 1.00) also confirms a perfect fit. Typically, for an adequate fit, the standardised root mean square residual (SRMR) should be less than 0.05, as recommended by Hu and Bentler [145].


              https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868.t004
Our study results demonstrate that access to basic services, land assets, and farm equipment significantly enhances household resilience. The positive impact of these factors on RCI suggests promising avenues for further research. Future studies could delve into how these components bolster agricultural system resilience, aiding government efforts in designing effective action plans. Exploring potential interactions among these factors could yield insights into the intricate dynamics of resilience. Interestingly, adaptive capacity showed no noticeable impact on RCI, highlighting the distinction between adaptation and resilience. Although our study indicates that livestock has a negative impact on resilience, it remains an invaluable resource for food security, income generation, and financial stability in rural economies. Livestock plays a crucial role in resilience management by acting as a liquid asset during economic crises, enhancing agricultural output through soil fertility and draft power, and improving access to financing.
Building resilience remains the most effective strategy to withstand shocks. In developing countries, policies and programs aimed at improving household resilience can significantly advance long-term food security. Humanitarian resilience initiatives should prioritize addressing rural populations` needs, as they face heightened exposure to food insecurity. Study results indicate that prioritising access to basic services such as healthcare, education, and sanitation in rural areas is crucial for fostering local and national resilience. Furthermore, enhancing incentives for land protection and promoting sustainable land management practices can enhance agricultural resilience. Policies supporting agricultural technology and equipment can also bolster resilience. Implementing social safety nets and encouraging farmers to diversify their revenue streams are effective strategies beyond human-centric protection measures. To enhance the sustainability of livestock assets, policymakers should focus on improving the affordability and accessibility of veterinary services and climate-resilient livestock management at the grassroots level. Subsidies on livestock medicine, feed, and improved breeds should also be provided to reduce maintenance costs. Strengthening adaptive capacity requires skill-based education, financial inclusion, and institutional support to foster entrepreneurship and human capital development, thereby creating more employment opportunities and improving infrastructure. Additionally, targeted awareness programs should encourage women’s participation in household and community decision-making, ensuring gender-inclusive resilience-building strategies.
However, the data used in our analysis were not explicitly gathered for resilience measurement purposes, which may limit the depth and accuracy of our study. Using cross-sectional data limits the ability to capture dynamic changes in household resilience over time, as it provides only a snapshot rather than reflecting long-term trends. Thereby restricts our ability to draw definitive conclusions about long-term resilience to food insecurity. It is important to acknowledge that, while this study emphasizes the role of land access and basic services in strengthening household resilience, social capital, gender dynamics, and power disparities are also significant, though less visible, factors influencing resilience in rural Bangladesh. These factors could not be explicitly incorporated into the SEM analysis due to dataset constraints. Furthermore, the absence of data related to recent shocks, disasters, or conflicts in our analysis limits the comprehensiveness of our study. These data constraints hinder our ability to examine the impact of acute events on household resilience, potentially overlooking critical dimensions of resilience dynamics. Future research should utilize longitudinal datasets specifically designed for resilience measurement, incorporating multiple survey rounds to capture temporal dynamics. Additionally, integrating socio-institutional variables with real-time data on shocks, disasters, and conflicts will enhance the comprehensiveness of resilience analysis, enabling a more accurate assessment of household responses to food insecurity.
Appendix Table 1. Description of the variables. Appendix Table 2. Descriptive statistics.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0332868.s001
(DOCX)
For more information about PLOS Subject Areas, click
        here.
Is the Subject Area ""Food"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Bangladesh"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Livestock"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Farms"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Equipment"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Food consumption"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Livestock care"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.
Is the Subject Area ""Factor analysis"" applicable to this article?
          Yes
No
Thanks for your feedback.


PLOS is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) corporation, #C2354500, based in California, US "
11,2025-09-22,"Dishonest governance is rarely a single act or brazen deal; more often, it appears as a set of habits that spread through a society.
Corruption is one of the most important—and misunderstood—concepts in contemporary American politics. Some examples are unambiguous: for instance, New Jersey Senator Bob Menendez taking gold bars from foreign governments in exchange for policy favors. But corruption covers a wide range of behavior, far beyond kickbacks and bribery. I’ve spent my career studying how it shapes legal and political systems, and I’ve found that it’s rarely a single act or brazen deal; more often, it appears as a set of habits that spreads through society like a creeping disease.
For most of history, corruption has been known as the central, ongoing challenge of self-government. In Aristotle’s traditional formulation, it encompasses all selfish use of public power toward private ends. The American Founders worried about it; George Mason warned that without active vigilance against it, “our government will soon be at an end.” And yet today, many of the practices that meet Aristotle’s definition of corruption—interest groups paying for special consideration, the influence given to lobbyists and campaign donors—are both legal and widely accepted in America. Groups such as Transparency International have noted major growth in the public’s perception of corruption over the past decade. Meanwhile, in the Trump administration, conflicts of interest are flagrant and ubiquitous.
This reading list provides a partial tour through the moral architecture of corruption: how it’s justified, how it’s buried, and how it reshapes the definitions of legitimacy. Together, these books will give you a deeper sense of what efforts have, historically, thwarted corruption, and make clear what its compounded effects do to a society over generations.

Rubicon: The Last Years of the Roman Republic, by Tom Holland
Holland’s Rubicon is a fast-paced, compelling narrative that vividly outlines the role of corruption in Rome’s collapse. Through profiles of the leaders Caesar, Cicero, and Sulla, Holland demonstrates how political office became transactional: Governors extracted wealth from provinces, bribed voters, and relied on paramilitary gangs to sway elections. What were once civic duties, such as collecting taxes and maintaining order, became investment opportunities, and the commodification of public service weakened once-strong notions of citizenship and civic duty. As an alliance grew between senators and financial powers, public figures began profiting from real-estate speculation, slave trading, and overseas plunder—while masking their involvement. For all his detailed research, Holland’s real gift is for explaining corruption not as a set of individual actions but as a broad culture of permission and self-justification. Rubicon is a warning about how republics decay, and how institutional reverence alone, without cultivating a common moral framework, is not sufficient to keep a state intact.

Politics, by Aristotle
Supreme Court Justice John Roberts has said that actionable corruption exists only when there is “quid pro quo,” or explicit exchange, which does not encompass influence, access, or the degradation of social systems for personal benefit. The economic theory of corruption, pushed by many academics, takes a similar approach: It does not treat corporate actions as corrupting unless they are also lawbreaking. The next time you run into someone who wants to suggest something similar, send them to Aristotle. In Politics, he outlines three forms of government and their corrupt counterparts, distinguishing between correct and deviant constitutions by asking whether rulers govern for the common good or for their own advantage. When leaders of any kind stop appealing to the common advantage and instead become motivated by self-interest, their government degenerates: Monarchy, for example, becomes tyranny, without so much as a handshake. The philosopher’s relational, grounded work teaches that every government contains seeds of its own downfall, and that watchfulness, virtue, and civic education are necessary to prevent decline. His account remains relevant today, as he is clear-eyed about the unchanging substance of human nature.
Read: America has never seen corruption like this

Red Harvest, by Dashiell Hammett
Hammett’s 1929 novel offers one of the most brutal and engaging accounts of normalized lawlessness in America. In Personville, sardonically called “Poisonville,” every association is bought, compromised, or controlled by criminal networks. The police chief is in bed with mobsters. Business owners run protection rackets. Judges are for sale. The narrator, a nameless detective known only as the “Continental Op,” is sent to solve a straightforward crime, but when he starts unraveling the case, he decides to purge the city of its ills—manipulating its gangsters, union bosses, and captains of industry into destroying one another. Hammett’s fictional portrait is allegedly drawn from the time he spent in Butte, Montana, in the early 1900s, when it was dominated by the Anaconda Copper Company and full of labor unrest; he worked for, and was disillusioned by, the union-busting Pinkerton agency. Red Harvest is the dream of democracy in its most cynical, stripped-down form: wealth without justice, survival without virtue.

Who Will Tell the People: The Betrayal of American Democracy, by William Greider
More than 30 years ago, Greider, a conscientious journalist with a keen eye for detail, exposed how the American political system had been bent toward wealthy interests who could afford to hire lobbyists. In this prescient document of dysfunction, he tells uncomfortable stories: The revolving door between private and government-agency jobs builds social ties among regulators and the industries they oversee, which inevitably lead to conflicts of interest, he writes; blueprints for legislation are drafted for future administrations by corporate lobbyists; likewise, public hearings are designed for insiders’ benefit, rather than for public accountability. In one emblematic section, Greider details how big banks developed the framework for George H. W. Bush’s 1989 bailout long before it was proposed, setting the terms of the debate far in advance. On Capitol Hill and in corporate boardrooms, he argues, theoretically neutral economic modeling and technocratic jargon are tools of obfuscation, turning moral decisions about who gets benefits or breaks into mystifying discussions that camouflage self-dealing as procedural necessity.
Read: McCutcheon and the new banana republic

Thieves of State: Why Corruption Threatens Global Security, by Sarah Chayes
Kleptocratic governments are not weak or failing, Chayes argues in this paradigm-shifting 2015 book. Instead, what outsiders mistake as a lack of control is usually careful management of who gets to steal and how the spoils are distributed. Corruption metastasizes, she writes, when rulers and elites design networks of family members, bureaucrats, and security forces that serve to siphon money—and over time, opportunistic graft hardens into a system that is purposefully maintained to keep the cash flowing. In these states, even anti-corruption rhetoric, laws, and commissions can become part of the machine: They’re made purposefully toothless, or selectively wielded against rivals. Most important, these corrupt webs generate extremism and unrest in the long run. Chayes’s central case study is Afghanistan; she argues that the self-serving police, courts, and ministries fueled support for the Taliban. Chayes traces this pattern far beyond Kabul. In Nigeria, corruption in the oil sector and security forces helped Boko Haram take root; in Tunisia and Egypt, rage at theft by officials ignited the destabilizing Arab Spring. When governments fail to deliver services, instead extracting value, Chayes’s book warns, radical alternatives can become far more appealing than the actual state.

Dark Money, by Jane Mayer
Mayer’s masterpiece, now almost a decade old, remains the definitive investigation of modern campaign finance. Dark Money shows how a small cadre of right-wing billionaires, with Charles and David Koch at the center, reshaped American politics in the 2010s. Her animating phrase came into wide use after the Supreme Court’s 2010 Citizens United ruling, and largely refers to political spending whose source is hidden from the public, usually through a web of nonprofit organizations that allow coordinated political operations to masquerade as apolitical civic activity. The Kochs didn’t merely bankroll candidates, Mayer writes; they constructed an alternative political and philanthropic infrastructure—a sprawling network of foundations, academic programs, media outlets, think tanks, legal societies, and shell organizations—designed to outlast any single election cycle and distance donors’ names and reputations from their activities. Dark Money is not just a story of influence-peddling; it is an anatomy of cultural corruption, in which intellectual legitimacy is bought and public institutions are deceitfully taken over.
Read: The story of the Gilded Age wasn’t wealth. It was corruption.

Black Reconstruction in America, by W. E. B. Du Bois
The period following the Civil War presented a brief opportunity for a multiracial democracy to take root in the United States. That potential was strangled, Du Bois writes in this book, an essential look at governance and betrayal in America. Reconstruction’s failure rests not only on Ku Klux Klan violence and political dealmaking, but also on the calculated withdrawal of northern financial elites. They had supported it for their own advantage, then abandoned it after securing their desired control over industry, tariffs, and finance. In Du Bois’s telling, this was a national bargain; together, northern capital and southern oligarchy aligned to sacrifice Black citizenship for economic consolidation. Along with a coalition of manufacturers and party bosses, they redirected federal power away from protecting freed people and toward securing national markets, suppressing labor, and stabilizing white-supremacist rule in the South. After outlining that corrupt deal, Du Bois dissects how scholarship sympathetic to the northern interests then rewrote Reconstruction’s history, turning the period into a fable of failure while caricaturing Black political leadership and widespread democratic participation. Black Reconstruction is a masterwork of political economy, historical revision, and moral clarity—and remains a caution for its modern readers.

​When you buy a book using a link on this page, we receive a commission. Thank you for supporting The Atlantic.
TheAtlantic.com © 2025 The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights Reserved.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply"
12,2025-09-22,"When a 41-year-old Nigerian mother of two appeared before an immigration judge in New Jersey this January, she was ready with her life story.  Laura, as her friends call her, arrived in the United States on a tourist visa in 2020. She was fleeing domestic vio…"
13,2025-09-22,"If a theoretical economy relies on the exchange of intended things, a profitable economy relies on the waste produced by the production, distribution and sale of those things."
14,2025-09-22,Suspects in the attempted murder of Nigerian singer Lil Kesh have been arrested in Kano after forcefully taking about ₦2 million from him in Lagos.
15,2025-09-21,"
            Weeds cover the grave of Yagana Usman’s baby – a painful reminder of the months that have passed since she lost her infant twin to malnutrition. Her surviving twin’s fate now hinges in part on decisions made thousands of miles away in Washington, DC.
    

            Usman and her family are sheltering in a camp for displaced people in northeastern Nigeria’s Borno state, where the Boko Haram terror group first emerged.
    

            During her eight years at Fulatari camp in the town of Dikwa – a refuge for those fleeing Boko Haram – six of her 13 children have died. Usman, 40, told CNN her most recent loss was in March, just days after a US-funded nutrition program that had provided therapeutic food packets to her malnourished twins was abruptly halted.
    

            Earlier this year, the Trump administration froze foreign aid and cut support for programs aid groups deemed lifesaving – decisions that quickly turned into life-or-death realities for families like Usman’s. The nutrition program in Dikwa, which was funded by the US Agency for International Development (USAID), received a sudden stop-work order during the administration’s aid freeze, according to the nonprofit that implemented the work, Mercy Corps.
    

            In March, UNICEF warned that critical nutrition supplies for acutely malnourished children were rapidly dwindling in Nigeria and Ethiopia. The agency cautioned that nearly 1.3 million children under the age of five in conflict-affected northeastern Nigeria and Ethiopia’s drought-stricken Afar region could lose access to treatment this year, heightening their risk of death as funding is removed.
    

            The impact of these funding cuts is forecast to be felt elsewhere in Africa too. In August, Save the Children reported that millions of malnourished children in Kenya, Somalia and South Sudan and other countries will also be affected.
    

            Last month, the United Nations’ World Food Programme (WFP) raised similar alarms, warning that its funding from international donors was “drying up,” forcing it to reduce food and nutrition assistance to hundreds of thousands of vulnerable people in northeastern Nigeria – children, in particular.
    

            It added that more than 150 nutrition clinics it supported in the region were at risk of closure.
    

            A US State Department spokesperson told CNN on Wednesday that US-funded food assistance to internally displaced people and communities in Nigeria’s Borno state had resumed. Aid workers have said that projects resumed at a lower capacity, with significant reductions to the work being carried out.
    

            Asked about broader cuts to food assistance programs, the State Department spokesperson said the US had recently provided $93 million to help nearly one million children suffering from malnutrition in 13 countries, including Kenya and South Sudan, and was also giving $52 million to the WFP for emergency food aid.
    

            “It is imperative to remember that the American taxpayer was never meant to bear the full burden of taking care of every person on Earth – whether that be with food, medicine, or otherwise. Despite this, America continues to be the most generous nation in the world,” a State Department spokesperson told CNN.
    

            “This Administration is significantly enhancing the efficiency and strategic impact of foreign assistance programs and continues to deliver life-saving assistance around the world.”
    

            Roughly 5.4 million children under 5 in Nigeria’s northeast and northwest suffer from acute malnutrition, according to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC), an international food-security body that tracks global hunger crises. Of these children, around 1.8 million face severe acute malnutrition, it said.
    

            “Additionally, approximately 787,000 pregnant and breastfeeding women are acutely malnourished,” the IPC report, released last year, stated.
    

            Usman’s twin boys were among more than 55,000 children receiving therapeutic food in Borno before the program was abruptly ended earlier this year, following a US funding cut, according to Mercy Corps, which operated three outpatient nutrition clinics in northeast Nigeria.
    

            Mercy Corps said it was forced to close 42 programs earlier this year that could have reached more than 3.6 million people in crisis hotspots, including Nigeria, Sudan, Afghanistan, Somalia, Gaza and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
    

            The impact has been devastating for Usman. The loss of her son compounded her grief – she had already lost her triplets just three days after their birth in 2023.
    

            “I was sick and had no breastmilk,” she recalled of her triplets’ brief lives. “There was nothing I could afford to give them to survive, so the babies died of hunger.”
    

            Usman began receiving additional food assistance from the WFP last year, but this month she was informed that she would no longer qualify, she said, as the agency reallocates its limited resources.
    

            David Stevenson, WFP’s chief in Nigeria, told CNN the agency was forced to make cuts, and would be reducing support in the north of the country from 1.3 million people in July to 850,000 by September.
    

            Stevenson thanked the United States, the WFP’s largest donor, for a $32.5 million donation the US Embassy in Nigeria announced on September 3 “for food and nutrition assistance to help save lives in Nigeria.”
    

            However, he warned that the US contribution, together with less than $10 million from other donors, would only keep operations running until the end of November.
    

            Stevenson said that the available resources would help reopen several nutrition clinics and provide food assistance to some communities and displaced people – a temporary reprieve following recent closures.
    

            Hassan Abubakar Bukar, a nutrition counsellor in Borno, told CNN that malnourished children are a painfully common sight. Deaths from undernutrition, like that of Usman’s baby, are tragically frequent in the region.
    

            “Almost every month, we encounter stories like these,” he said.
    

            “Because of fewer (nutrition clinic) sites in Dikwa, a lot of malnourished children are left out,” Bukar said. “The parents cannot afford (nutritious) diets, so most of the children may die at home.”
    

            Usman is anxious about the fate of her surviving twin, who is 18 months old and in need of nutritional treatment.
    

            “I have that fear in my mind. I’m always thinking about how I could get something to feed him,” she said.
    

            Mercy Corps told CNN there is a glimmer of hope for vulnerable people. In June, two of the organization’s previously closed health centers reopened after their US-funded project was allowed to continue following the earlier stop-work order.
    

            The Trump administration had previously canceled more than 80% of programs at USAID, which delivered US humanitarian aid overseas. It later essentially shuttered the agency, claiming it was engaged in waste and abuse, and moved foreign aid administration under the State Department, which critics say has not delivered on much of USAID’s legacy work.
    

Famed South African activist gets back into fight for HIV meds after USAID cuts


            The nutrition centers now run under an extension of the project, with existing USAID funding rolled over, according to Mercy Corps’ regional director for Africa, Melaku Yirga. But this will only last until October, Yirga added.
    

            Usman’s surviving twin was readmitted to the nutrition program in July and still receives ready-to-use therapeutic food packets and critical care for severe malnutrition, Mercy Corps said, but the threat of further funding cuts puts ongoing treatment for this child and others at risk.
    

            The US provides the world’s largest portion of humanitarian aid, spending more than $54 billion since 2021, with $3.8 billion allocated to Africa last year, Jeffrey Prescott, who was the US ambassador to the UN Agencies for Food and Agriculture in Rome until January, said in a speech last year.
    

            “It’s really less than 1% of the federal budget,” Margaret Schuler, the chief impact officer at the global Christian humanitarian organization World Vision, said about America’s yearly humanitarian spending.
    

            “We really believe that foreign aid is a great investment for the US government in terms of the return it brings,” she told CNN, citing global benefits like progress toward eradicating polio and reducing infectious diseases.
    

            World Vision had about $100 million worth of US government funding cut, according to Schuler.
    

            “Like many organizations, we had programs cut across all regions in the world, over 20 countries, and what was a little bit surprising was the fact that what would have been considered ‘lifesaving programs’ were terminated,” including programs in Mali, South Sudan and Kenya, Schuler told CNN in August.
    

US foreign aid cuts threaten decades of progress on driving down malaria


            “Those were programs that were serving some of the most vulnerable populations around the world.”
    

            She warned that filling the funding gaps would be difficult.
    

            “For some of these large-scale food aid programs or programs that we implement at scale in the hardest places around the world, it’s very hard to fill some of those gaps with private resources.”
    

            Meanwhile, the Trump administration is trying to freeze another $4.9 billion in foreign aid that was approved by Congress in 2024 but that the White House says no longer aligns with its “America-first” priorities to ensure overseas spending makes the country “safer, stronger, and more prosperous.” Trump is mounting a multifront effort to cancel that foreign aid spending both in the courts and on Capitol Hill.
    

            In Yirga’s view, an abrupt end to US foreign assistance “risks reversing decades of progress, forcing families into dangerous coping strategies and stripping away their last lifeline.”
    

            He cautioned, “The world cannot afford to look away – not when mothers like Yagana (Usman) face the unbearable risk of losing more children.”
    
© 2025 Cable News Network. A Warner Bros. Discovery Company. All Rights Reserved.  CNN Sans ™ & © 2016 Cable News Network."
16,2025-09-21,"
							By 

	Gillian Brockell


	Two American military cargo jets deported people to Africa this month on flights that appear to have had their transponders turned off, obscuring their locations from public flight databases and other nearby aircraft. 

	One of the jets was later identified in a lawsuit in U.S. federal court as carrying 14 Nigerian and Gambian nationals to a prison camp in Ghana. They have since been returned to their countries of origin, Ghana said, despite all having credible fears of persecution or torture. The other jet secretly landed in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Mali, according to communications from the flight deck obtained by Rolling Stone. Representatives for the governments of these countries did not respond to emails about the passengers on this jet.

	The secret flights are part of what appears to be a surge in Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) activity across the African continent, following a pressure campaign led by President Donald Trump on many of the governments there over the summer.

	










	“The administration is using military secrecy to cover for what is basically a law enforcement/immigration enforcement function,” an activist flight tracker who goes by JJ in DC told Rolling Stone. “If this is being done in our interest, we have a right to know where these deportation flights are going.” 

	While it is legal for military aircraft to turn off their transponders, this is generally reserved for combat and surveillance missions, JJ in DC, who is a military veteran, said. Military flights also cost much more to operate than charter carriers, as much as $28,500 an hour, according to Reuters. 

	










	The Air Force did not respond to a request for comment. After this story was published, a representative for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) told Rolling Stone the second flight “had stops in multiple countries to return illegal aliens to their home countries.”

	“If you come to our country illegally, you could end up in CECOT or in any number of third countries like Ghana,” the spokesperson says, adding that the administration is “using every tool available to get criminal illegal aliens out of American communities and out of our country. Our message is clear: Criminals are not welcome in the United States.”





	
		Editor’s picks
	
	











	
	
		
					The 250 Greatest Albums of the 21st Century So Far		
	














	
	
		
					The 100 Best TV Episodes of All Time		
	














	
	
		
					The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time		
	














	
	
		
					100 Best Movies of the 21st Century		
	








	Both secret trips were on Air Force C-17 Globemasters. The first one left McChord Field near Tacoma, Wash., on the evening of Sept. 4, stopping at the ICE-detention hub city of Alexandria, La., and the U.S. military outpost at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba — which Trump has converted into an ICE facility holding what he has baselessly claimed are “the worst of the worst” deportees. The flight landed in St. Croix in the U.S. Virgin Islands, a likely fuel stop, the next afternoon.

	These flights were conducted without the standard transponder signal, called Automatic Dependent Signal-Broadcast, or ADS-B, which transmits constant information about a flight, including registration, location, speed, and altitude, to any receiver within range. The C-17 used an alternative signal transmitting its registration but no location or other flight data — though flight-tracking websites could still approximate its location through a kind of triangulation.  

	It is unclear when exactly the C-17 left St. Croix, because by then it was using another type of signal even harder to detect, in which an aircraft transmits its location via data link only when requested by a specific partner, like an air base. Different flight-tracking websites were able to capture different fragments of the C-17’s trajectory — a single blip over the Atlantic Ocean on the night of Sept. 5 and part of a descent toward Accra, Ghana’s capital, the next morning. 





	
		Related Content
	
	






	
	
		
					‘It’s a Way of Protesting’: Cristela Alonzo on Her New Special, ‘Upper Classy’		
	









	
	
		
					Inside Stephen Miller’s Reign of Terror		
	









	
	
		
					Bad Bunny Says He Skipped the U.S. on Tour Over Concerns That ICE ‘Could Be Outside’ His Concerts		
	









	
	
		
					No Kings Unveils a Big New Trump Protest, and the Stakes Couldn’t Be Higher		
	








	Hours later, a brief signal showed it landing in Cape Verde, probably for crew rest, before returning home. Its ADS-B transponder began transmitting again on Sept 10. Two days later, a lawsuit filed in a U.S. District Court alleged the flight held 14 men — 13 from Nigeria and one from The Gambia — who had all been granted protections from removal to their countries of origin for fear of persecution or torture. They were loaded onto the cargo jet in the middle of the night with no advance warning, they alleged, and were only told where they were going when the plane was in the air. One Nigerian man said that after he asked to speak to his lawyers, he was “straitjacketed for several hours” — seeming to refer to the WRAP device ICE uses on immigrants who resist transport, which has been the subject of a number of lawsuits over the years alleging use of the device has caused permanent injury and even death by asphyxiation. 

	










	“For the safety of our officers and the other detainees, some illegal aliens were placed in additional restraints,” the DHS spokesperson says. “We are not going to allow illegal aliens behaving erratically to jeopardize the safety of everyone on the flight.”

	Once in Ghana, the men said they were sent to an “abysmal” open-air prison camp and told they would be returned to their countries of origin — something the U.S. government had been barred from doing. Though Judge Tanya Chutkan called the Trump administration’s actions “disingenuous,” she ultimately ruled she did not have the jurisdiction to stop it. On Tuesday, Ghana said all of the men had been returned to their home countries, though attorneys told the Associated Press four were still in the Ghana prison.

	Human rights groups say this amounts to chain refoulement — the forcible expulsion of refugees and asylum seekers to countries where they are vulnerable to return to countries where they face persecution — and violates both domestic and international law.

	“What is alarming today is the emerging pattern of shadowy deportations of people who have not had access to a court or any meaningful form of due process — removals that bear the hallmarks of forced disappearances under international law,” says Rebecca Sharpless, a University of Miami law professor who studies ICE flights.

	Accepting third-country nationals “should not be misconstrued as an endorsement of the immigration policies of the Trump administration,” Ghanaian foreign minister Samuel Okudzeto Ablakwa said Monday. “Our decision is grounded purely on humanitarian principle and Pan-African empathy.”

	The second C-17 trip began like the first one — Alexandria, Gitmo, St. Croix, no ADS-B transponder but still trackable — before becoming even harder to detect when it left St. Croix. One flight-tracking website captured a few blips as it headed toward the western coast of Africa in the small hours of Sept. 10, and two blips over Senegal later that evening. The other flight-tracking website didn’t capture anything at all, which one activist described as “very weird.” 

	Two of the flight deck transmissions Rolling Stone obtained, which are not available on flight-tracking websites, show the pilots planning to land at Roberts International Airport in Monrovia, Liberia, and Freetown International Airport in Sierra Leone that morning, with a third transmission showing an intended stop in Mali’s capital of Bamako in the early afternoon. The final stop in Senegal was likely for crew rest.

	










	Two other military aircraft are known to have done ICE missions without broadcasting transponder signals: the jets that carried third-country nationals from a U.S. base in Djibouti to South Sudan and Eswatini in July. 

	That same month, Trump held a bizarre “Africa summit” at the White House, gathering five of the continent’s 50-plus leaders around a conference table, where he extolled their “very valuable land, great minerals, great oil deposits, and wonderful people” and fished for compliments from his fellow heads of state. (“A tremendous golfer.” “Deserves the Nobel Peace Prize.”) And, Trump said, they were making progress on third-country agreements.





	
		Trending Stories
	
	






	
	
		
					Are We Witnessing the Fall of the American Empire?		
	









	
	
		
					Priscilla Presley Calls Michael Jackson ‘Manipulative’: 7 Things We Learned From New Memoir		
	









	
	
		
					Elon Musk’s Estranged Father Accused of Child Sex Abuse		
	









	
	
		
					Darius Rucker's New Supergroup With Members of R.E.M., Black Crowes Announce Tour		
	








	Since then, ICE flights to Africa are surging. A new ICE charter, Paradigm Jet Management, has entered the picture, running at least eight deportation trips to and from the continent in the last six weeks. ICE also sent seven third-country nationals to Rwanda on two Gulfstream jets, and now the Trump administration is threatening to send Kilmar Abrego Garcia to Uganda and Mahmoud Khalil to Algeria (or Syria). Omni Air International carried Russian dissidents to Egypt, where they were forced onto a plane to Moscow, and last week flew an eight-stop deportation mega-route from Senegal to the Democratic Republic of Congo, where passengers on the last stop likely spent more than 50 hours shackled in handcuffs and leg irons attached to chains around their waists.

	And there have been at least five ICE missions to Africa on military jets, though if the last two are any indication, they are getting increasingly harder to spot.
We want to hear it. Send us a tip using our anonymous form.
Rolling Stone is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2025 Rolling Stone, LLC. All rights reserved."
17,2025-09-20,"Skip to comments.
Posted on 09/20/2025 11:54:26 AM PDT by MinorityRepublican
The US population is approaching a critical demographic milestone as deaths are now projected to exceed births as early as 2031, two years earlier than previously expected. This shift signals a trend toward near-zero population growth, raising concerns about the country's economic future and social support systems. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) updated its population projections in September 2025, attributing the accelerated timing mainly to declining fertility rates and tightened immigration enforcement resulting from the Trump administration’s recent immigration policies. The Trump-era One Big Beautiful Bill Act, with its aggressive immigration crackdown, is projected to reduce immigration flows significantly, further dampening population growth. According to the CBO, from 2026 to 2029, about 290,000 immigrants are expected to be removed from the country under this new legislation, plus an additional 30,000 departures considered voluntary. This reduction in immigrant families, historically contributing higher birth rates, coupled with a natural decrease in fertility rates, accelerates the timing when deaths surpass births. Currently, the US population stands around 350 million and was previously expected to grow to 372 million by 2055. These new projections estimate a smaller overall population of 367 million by that year. Moreover, the working-age population is expected to shrink, posing a risk to the labor supply critical for sustained economic growth.
(Excerpt) Read more at m.economictimes.com ...

TOPICS: Chit/Chat; Society
KEYWORDS: safeandeffective


Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-72 next last




1
posted on 09/20/2025 11:54:26 AM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Not a problem. In Syria, North Africa, Nigeria and a dozen places in Latin America, people have got kids in the pipeline to backfill the shortage. The next democrat president will greenlight their importation.

2
posted on 09/20/2025 11:57:32 AM PDT
by sphinx

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

The gd labor supply will be fine. Where is the wage inflation? There is none at all. Wages flat for 30 years and they are not even keeping up with inflation.

3
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:14 PM PDT
by central_va
( I won't be reconstructed and I do not give a damn...)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Of course it’s declining, when you have foreigners that have invaded this country, and nutcases running free to murder as many people as they want.

4
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:21 PM PDT
by mass55th
(“Courage is being scared to death, but saddling up anyway.”   ― John Wayne)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

The above should make Gates happy.

5
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:38 PM PDT
by A Navy Vet
(USA Birth Certificate - 1789.  Death Certificate - 2021? )

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Oh stop! We have 334 million people in the US. Were actively trying to get rid of about 30 million of them. We are in no danger of extinction. 🙄

6
posted on 09/20/2025 12:01:47 PM PDT
by Georgia Girl 2
(The only purpose of a pistol is to fight your way back to the rifle you should never have dropped)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

“””The US population is approaching a critical demographic milestone as deaths are now projected to exceed births as early as 2031,””””

Is this really a problem?
Fewer people would stop the huge increase in the price of housing.
Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.
Fewer people would mean the population of the USA would not keep increasing to 500 million or more. Who wants an America where farmlands are converted to housing suburbs?
Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.

7
posted on 09/20/2025 12:02:27 PM PDT
by Presbyterian Reporter

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: Georgia Girl 2

We have 334 million people in the US. Were actively trying to get rid of about 30 million of them. We are in no danger of extinction.Correct. But in 2000, there were 3.4 workers for every Social Security beneficiary. By 2024, that ratio dropped to 2.7, and it is projected to fall to just 2.3 over the next decade.

8
posted on 09/20/2025 12:03:24 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 6
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

Fewer people would stop the huge increase in the price of housing. Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.And then we'll have to get rid of Social Security.

9
posted on 09/20/2025 12:05:21 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Faygs don’t reproduce. They recruit.

10
posted on 09/20/2025 12:05:38 PM PDT
by crusty old prospector

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Well cheer up the baby boomers are dropping like flies so doubtful that will be a long term problem.

11
posted on 09/20/2025 12:06:11 PM PDT
by Georgia Girl 2
(The only purpose of a pistol is to fight your way back to the rifle you should never have dropped)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 8
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

    What with the mass killing of kids through abortion.

12
posted on 09/20/2025 12:07:53 PM PDT
by SkyDancer
(                                    ~ Am Yisrael Chai ~)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

“Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.”
Plus, the government “targets” two percent inflation. It’s
“Good for the economy.” But they only count the things they want to count. Medical costs, taxes, insurance, energy and a host of real-life costs rise too. The overall effect is ten percent per year. This is the primary reason nobody can afford a house or a new car. There are a lot of other factors but all of them, like H1B visas are a result of government policy. We have met the enemy and mostly voted it into office.

13
posted on 09/20/2025 12:11:25 PM PDT
by Gen.Blather
(Wait!  I said that out loud.  Sorry. )

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: SkyDancer

Yeah, fifty years and around 70 million abortions left a mark.
Damn those seven lawyers on Scotus to hell.

14
posted on 09/20/2025 12:14:09 PM PDT
by Jacquerie
(ArticleVBlog.com)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 12
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

    --- ""Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security."" Government at all levels -- municipal to national -- run Ponzi schemes. Check your city and state to find out how much you are supposed to ""owe."" Then add in the amount of your ""share"" of the national debt you are supposed to owe, and realize that you are not conservative ENOUGH, and any RINOs and all Democrats are innumerate operators of the Ponzi schemes. So as the nation approaches ""a critical demographic milestone"" sooner rather than later is a good thing. The Ponzi schemes will collapse earlier rather than later, and the opportunity to recover will come earlier rather than later. Who'll be angry about that? All those on the debt-fueled gravy train.

15
posted on 09/20/2025 12:15:30 PM PDT
by Worldtraveler once upon a time
(Degrow government)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: Gen.Blather

“Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.”Correct. Our economic system depends on an increasing population.Get rid of Social Security and Medicare. Then we'll be okay with a declining population.

16
posted on 09/20/2025 12:16:48 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 13
 | View Replies]

To: SkyDancer

    Deep thanks for the brilliant cartoon.

17
posted on 09/20/2025 12:16:54 PM PDT
by Worldtraveler once upon a time
(Degrow government)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 12
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

This is the dirty little secret about why they opened the border. And Europe/UK has the same problem. As does Japan.
The population is shrinking, which means the economy will also shrink. And our economies must grow just to survive.
It’s a conundrum

18
posted on 09/20/2025 12:17:34 PM PDT
by cuban leaf
(2024 is going to be one for the history books, like 1939. And 2025 will be more so, like 1940-1945.)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: central_va

I am pretty sure we can make a society and an economy and a democracy that all works with a steady state population. In fact, I’m willing to bet the future of the USA on it!
The globalists view is that it’s easist, not necessarily better, to just keep growing to infinity.
As to Social Security, we each have our own accounts in the Social Security “lockbox,” don’t we?

19
posted on 09/20/2025 12:18:43 PM PDT
by oldplayer

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 3
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

At some point, we should reach an equilibrium where we don’t need a larger population. I’m not sure why that point isn’t right now. With the advent of AI, automation and so on it’s not like we never needed an ever expanding, workforce, and in fact, employment might be more difficult going forward because of emerging technology.
As long as we stop the Third World from pouring in and having them breed like fricking rabbits on welfare, I see no reason why we can’t just keep our population of current level levels going into the future

20
posted on 09/20/2025 12:20:41 PM PDT
by suasponte137

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]


Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-72 next last


Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.





Free Republic
Browse
  · Search



General/Chat
Topics
  · Post Article





FreeRepublic, LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794


FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson


The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) updated its population projections in September 2025, attributing the accelerated timing mainly to declining fertility rates and tightened immigration enforcement resulting from the Trump administration’s recent immigration policies. The Trump-era One Big Beautiful Bill Act, with its aggressive immigration crackdown, is projected to reduce immigration flows significantly, further dampening population growth. According to the CBO, from 2026 to 2029, about 290,000 immigrants are expected to be removed from the country under this new legislation, plus an additional 30,000 departures considered voluntary. This reduction in immigrant families, historically contributing higher birth rates, coupled with a natural decrease in fertility rates, accelerates the timing when deaths surpass births. Currently, the US population stands around 350 million and was previously expected to grow to 372 million by 2055. These new projections estimate a smaller overall population of 367 million by that year. Moreover, the working-age population is expected to shrink, posing a risk to the labor supply critical for sustained economic growth.
(Excerpt) Read more at m.economictimes.com ...

TOPICS: Chit/Chat; Society
KEYWORDS: safeandeffective


Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-72 next last




1
posted on 09/20/2025 11:54:26 AM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Not a problem. In Syria, North Africa, Nigeria and a dozen places in Latin America, people have got kids in the pipeline to backfill the shortage. The next democrat president will greenlight their importation.

2
posted on 09/20/2025 11:57:32 AM PDT
by sphinx

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

The gd labor supply will be fine. Where is the wage inflation? There is none at all. Wages flat for 30 years and they are not even keeping up with inflation.

3
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:14 PM PDT
by central_va
( I won't be reconstructed and I do not give a damn...)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Of course it’s declining, when you have foreigners that have invaded this country, and nutcases running free to murder as many people as they want.

4
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:21 PM PDT
by mass55th
(“Courage is being scared to death, but saddling up anyway.”   ― John Wayne)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

The above should make Gates happy.

5
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:38 PM PDT
by A Navy Vet
(USA Birth Certificate - 1789.  Death Certificate - 2021? )

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Oh stop! We have 334 million people in the US. Were actively trying to get rid of about 30 million of them. We are in no danger of extinction. 🙄

6
posted on 09/20/2025 12:01:47 PM PDT
by Georgia Girl 2
(The only purpose of a pistol is to fight your way back to the rifle you should never have dropped)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

“””The US population is approaching a critical demographic milestone as deaths are now projected to exceed births as early as 2031,””””

Is this really a problem?
Fewer people would stop the huge increase in the price of housing.
Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.
Fewer people would mean the population of the USA would not keep increasing to 500 million or more. Who wants an America where farmlands are converted to housing suburbs?
Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.

7
posted on 09/20/2025 12:02:27 PM PDT
by Presbyterian Reporter

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: Georgia Girl 2

We have 334 million people in the US. Were actively trying to get rid of about 30 million of them. We are in no danger of extinction.Correct. But in 2000, there were 3.4 workers for every Social Security beneficiary. By 2024, that ratio dropped to 2.7, and it is projected to fall to just 2.3 over the next decade.

8
posted on 09/20/2025 12:03:24 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 6
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

Fewer people would stop the huge increase in the price of housing. Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.And then we'll have to get rid of Social Security.

9
posted on 09/20/2025 12:05:21 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Faygs don’t reproduce. They recruit.

10
posted on 09/20/2025 12:05:38 PM PDT
by crusty old prospector

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Well cheer up the baby boomers are dropping like flies so doubtful that will be a long term problem.

11
posted on 09/20/2025 12:06:11 PM PDT
by Georgia Girl 2
(The only purpose of a pistol is to fight your way back to the rifle you should never have dropped)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 8
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

    What with the mass killing of kids through abortion.

12
posted on 09/20/2025 12:07:53 PM PDT
by SkyDancer
(                                    ~ Am Yisrael Chai ~)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

“Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.”
Plus, the government “targets” two percent inflation. It’s
“Good for the economy.” But they only count the things they want to count. Medical costs, taxes, insurance, energy and a host of real-life costs rise too. The overall effect is ten percent per year. This is the primary reason nobody can afford a house or a new car. There are a lot of other factors but all of them, like H1B visas are a result of government policy. We have met the enemy and mostly voted it into office.

13
posted on 09/20/2025 12:11:25 PM PDT
by Gen.Blather
(Wait!  I said that out loud.  Sorry. )

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: SkyDancer

Yeah, fifty years and around 70 million abortions left a mark.
Damn those seven lawyers on Scotus to hell.

14
posted on 09/20/2025 12:14:09 PM PDT
by Jacquerie
(ArticleVBlog.com)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 12
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

    --- ""Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security."" Government at all levels -- municipal to national -- run Ponzi schemes. Check your city and state to find out how much you are supposed to ""owe."" Then add in the amount of your ""share"" of the national debt you are supposed to owe, and realize that you are not conservative ENOUGH, and any RINOs and all Democrats are innumerate operators of the Ponzi schemes. So as the nation approaches ""a critical demographic milestone"" sooner rather than later is a good thing. The Ponzi schemes will collapse earlier rather than later, and the opportunity to recover will come earlier rather than later. Who'll be angry about that? All those on the debt-fueled gravy train.

15
posted on 09/20/2025 12:15:30 PM PDT
by Worldtraveler once upon a time
(Degrow government)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: Gen.Blather

“Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.”Correct. Our economic system depends on an increasing population.Get rid of Social Security and Medicare. Then we'll be okay with a declining population.

16
posted on 09/20/2025 12:16:48 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 13
 | View Replies]

To: SkyDancer

    Deep thanks for the brilliant cartoon.

17
posted on 09/20/2025 12:16:54 PM PDT
by Worldtraveler once upon a time
(Degrow government)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 12
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

This is the dirty little secret about why they opened the border. And Europe/UK has the same problem. As does Japan.
The population is shrinking, which means the economy will also shrink. And our economies must grow just to survive.
It’s a conundrum

18
posted on 09/20/2025 12:17:34 PM PDT
by cuban leaf
(2024 is going to be one for the history books, like 1939. And 2025 will be more so, like 1940-1945.)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: central_va

I am pretty sure we can make a society and an economy and a democracy that all works with a steady state population. In fact, I’m willing to bet the future of the USA on it!
The globalists view is that it’s easist, not necessarily better, to just keep growing to infinity.
As to Social Security, we each have our own accounts in the Social Security “lockbox,” don’t we?

19
posted on 09/20/2025 12:18:43 PM PDT
by oldplayer

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 3
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

At some point, we should reach an equilibrium where we don’t need a larger population. I’m not sure why that point isn’t right now. With the advent of AI, automation and so on it’s not like we never needed an ever expanding, workforce, and in fact, employment might be more difficult going forward because of emerging technology.
As long as we stop the Third World from pouring in and having them breed like fricking rabbits on welfare, I see no reason why we can’t just keep our population of current level levels going into the future

20
posted on 09/20/2025 12:20:41 PM PDT
by suasponte137

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]


Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-72 next last


Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.





Free Republic
Browse
  · Search



General/Chat
Topics
  · Post Article





FreeRepublic, LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794


FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson


According to the CBO, from 2026 to 2029, about 290,000 immigrants are expected to be removed from the country under this new legislation, plus an additional 30,000 departures considered voluntary. This reduction in immigrant families, historically contributing higher birth rates, coupled with a natural decrease in fertility rates, accelerates the timing when deaths surpass births. Currently, the US population stands around 350 million and was previously expected to grow to 372 million by 2055. These new projections estimate a smaller overall population of 367 million by that year. Moreover, the working-age population is expected to shrink, posing a risk to the labor supply critical for sustained economic growth.
(Excerpt) Read more at m.economictimes.com ...

TOPICS: Chit/Chat; Society
KEYWORDS: safeandeffective


Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-72 next last




1
posted on 09/20/2025 11:54:26 AM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Not a problem. In Syria, North Africa, Nigeria and a dozen places in Latin America, people have got kids in the pipeline to backfill the shortage. The next democrat president will greenlight their importation.

2
posted on 09/20/2025 11:57:32 AM PDT
by sphinx

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

The gd labor supply will be fine. Where is the wage inflation? There is none at all. Wages flat for 30 years and they are not even keeping up with inflation.

3
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:14 PM PDT
by central_va
( I won't be reconstructed and I do not give a damn...)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Of course it’s declining, when you have foreigners that have invaded this country, and nutcases running free to murder as many people as they want.

4
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:21 PM PDT
by mass55th
(“Courage is being scared to death, but saddling up anyway.”   ― John Wayne)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

The above should make Gates happy.

5
posted on 09/20/2025 12:00:38 PM PDT
by A Navy Vet
(USA Birth Certificate - 1789.  Death Certificate - 2021? )

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Oh stop! We have 334 million people in the US. Were actively trying to get rid of about 30 million of them. We are in no danger of extinction. 🙄

6
posted on 09/20/2025 12:01:47 PM PDT
by Georgia Girl 2
(The only purpose of a pistol is to fight your way back to the rifle you should never have dropped)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

“””The US population is approaching a critical demographic milestone as deaths are now projected to exceed births as early as 2031,””””

Is this really a problem?
Fewer people would stop the huge increase in the price of housing.
Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.
Fewer people would mean the population of the USA would not keep increasing to 500 million or more. Who wants an America where farmlands are converted to housing suburbs?
Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.

7
posted on 09/20/2025 12:02:27 PM PDT
by Presbyterian Reporter

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: Georgia Girl 2

We have 334 million people in the US. Were actively trying to get rid of about 30 million of them. We are in no danger of extinction.Correct. But in 2000, there were 3.4 workers for every Social Security beneficiary. By 2024, that ratio dropped to 2.7, and it is projected to fall to just 2.3 over the next decade.

8
posted on 09/20/2025 12:03:24 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 6
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

Fewer people would stop the huge increase in the price of housing. Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.And then we'll have to get rid of Social Security.

9
posted on 09/20/2025 12:05:21 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Faygs don’t reproduce. They recruit.

10
posted on 09/20/2025 12:05:38 PM PDT
by crusty old prospector

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

Well cheer up the baby boomers are dropping like flies so doubtful that will be a long term problem.

11
posted on 09/20/2025 12:06:11 PM PDT
by Georgia Girl 2
(The only purpose of a pistol is to fight your way back to the rifle you should never have dropped)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 8
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

    What with the mass killing of kids through abortion.

12
posted on 09/20/2025 12:07:53 PM PDT
by SkyDancer
(                                    ~ Am Yisrael Chai ~)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

“Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.”
Plus, the government “targets” two percent inflation. It’s
“Good for the economy.” But they only count the things they want to count. Medical costs, taxes, insurance, energy and a host of real-life costs rise too. The overall effect is ten percent per year. This is the primary reason nobody can afford a house or a new car. There are a lot of other factors but all of them, like H1B visas are a result of government policy. We have met the enemy and mostly voted it into office.

13
posted on 09/20/2025 12:11:25 PM PDT
by Gen.Blather
(Wait!  I said that out loud.  Sorry. )

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: SkyDancer

Yeah, fifty years and around 70 million abortions left a mark.
Damn those seven lawyers on Scotus to hell.

14
posted on 09/20/2025 12:14:09 PM PDT
by Jacquerie
(ArticleVBlog.com)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 12
 | View Replies]

To: Presbyterian Reporter

    --- ""Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security."" Government at all levels -- municipal to national -- run Ponzi schemes. Check your city and state to find out how much you are supposed to ""owe."" Then add in the amount of your ""share"" of the national debt you are supposed to owe, and realize that you are not conservative ENOUGH, and any RINOs and all Democrats are innumerate operators of the Ponzi schemes. So as the nation approaches ""a critical demographic milestone"" sooner rather than later is a good thing. The Ponzi schemes will collapse earlier rather than later, and the opportunity to recover will come earlier rather than later. Who'll be angry about that? All those on the debt-fueled gravy train.

15
posted on 09/20/2025 12:15:30 PM PDT
by Worldtraveler once upon a time
(Degrow government)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 7
 | View Replies]

To: Gen.Blather

“Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.”Correct. Our economic system depends on an increasing population.Get rid of Social Security and Medicare. Then we'll be okay with a declining population.

16
posted on 09/20/2025 12:16:48 PM PDT
by MinorityRepublican

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 13
 | View Replies]

To: SkyDancer

    Deep thanks for the brilliant cartoon.

17
posted on 09/20/2025 12:16:54 PM PDT
by Worldtraveler once upon a time
(Degrow government)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 12
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

This is the dirty little secret about why they opened the border. And Europe/UK has the same problem. As does Japan.
The population is shrinking, which means the economy will also shrink. And our economies must grow just to survive.
It’s a conundrum

18
posted on 09/20/2025 12:17:34 PM PDT
by cuban leaf
(2024 is going to be one for the history books, like 1939. And 2025 will be more so, like 1940-1945.)

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]

To: central_va

I am pretty sure we can make a society and an economy and a democracy that all works with a steady state population. In fact, I’m willing to bet the future of the USA on it!
The globalists view is that it’s easist, not necessarily better, to just keep growing to infinity.
As to Social Security, we each have our own accounts in the Social Security “lockbox,” don’t we?

19
posted on 09/20/2025 12:18:43 PM PDT
by oldplayer

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 3
 | View Replies]

To: MinorityRepublican

At some point, we should reach an equilibrium where we don’t need a larger population. I’m not sure why that point isn’t right now. With the advent of AI, automation and so on it’s not like we never needed an ever expanding, workforce, and in fact, employment might be more difficult going forward because of emerging technology.
As long as we stop the Third World from pouring in and having them breed like fricking rabbits on welfare, I see no reason why we can’t just keep our population of current level levels going into the future

20
posted on 09/20/2025 12:20:41 PM PDT
by suasponte137

[
Post Reply
 | Private Reply
 | To 1
 | View Replies]


Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-72 next last


Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.





Free Republic
Browse
  · Search



General/Chat
Topics
  · Post Article





FreeRepublic, LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794


FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson


Currently, the US population stands around 350 million and was previously expected to grow to 372 million by 2055. These new projections estimate a smaller overall population of 367 million by that year. Moreover, the working-age population is expected to shrink, posing a risk to the labor supply critical for sustained economic growth.
(Excerpt) Read more at m.economictimes.com ...
Not a problem. In Syria, North Africa, Nigeria and a dozen places in Latin America, people have got kids in the pipeline to backfill the shortage. The next democrat president will greenlight their importation.
The gd labor supply will be fine. Where is the wage inflation? There is none at all. Wages flat for 30 years and they are not even keeping up with inflation.
Of course it’s declining, when you have foreigners that have invaded this country, and nutcases running free to murder as many people as they want.
The above should make Gates happy.
Oh stop! We have 334 million people in the US. Were actively trying to get rid of about 30 million of them. We are in no danger of extinction. 🙄
“””The US population is approaching a critical demographic milestone as deaths are now projected to exceed births as early as 2031,””””

Is this really a problem?
Fewer people would stop the huge increase in the price of housing.
Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.
Fewer people would mean the population of the USA would not keep increasing to 500 million or more. Who wants an America where farmlands are converted to housing suburbs?
Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.
Correct. But in 2000, there were 3.4 workers for every Social Security beneficiary. By 2024, that ratio dropped to 2.7, and it is projected to fall to just 2.3 over the next decade.

 Fewer people would mean less traffic congestion.

Faygs don’t reproduce. They recruit.
Well cheer up the baby boomers are dropping like flies so doubtful that will be a long term problem.


“Government is the primary organization that wants an increasing population. That is how they pay for programs like social security.”
Plus, the government “targets” two percent inflation. It’s
“Good for the economy.” But they only count the things they want to count. Medical costs, taxes, insurance, energy and a host of real-life costs rise too. The overall effect is ten percent per year. This is the primary reason nobody can afford a house or a new car. There are a lot of other factors but all of them, like H1B visas are a result of government policy. We have met the enemy and mostly voted it into office.
Yeah, fifty years and around 70 million abortions left a mark.
Damn those seven lawyers on Scotus to hell.
 Government at all levels -- municipal to national -- run Ponzi schemes. Check your city and state to find out how much you are supposed to ""owe."" Then add in the amount of your ""share"" of the national debt you are supposed to owe, and realize that you are not conservative ENOUGH, and any RINOs and all Democrats are innumerate operators of the Ponzi schemes. So as the nation approaches ""a critical demographic milestone"" sooner rather than later is a good thing. The Ponzi schemes will collapse earlier rather than later, and the opportunity to recover will come earlier rather than later. Who'll be angry about that? All those on the debt-fueled gravy train.

 Government at all levels -- municipal to national -- run Ponzi schemes. Check your city and state to find out how much you are supposed to ""owe."" Then add in the amount of your ""share"" of the national debt you are supposed to owe, and realize that you are not conservative ENOUGH, and any RINOs and all Democrats are innumerate operators of the Ponzi schemes. So as the nation approaches ""a critical demographic milestone"" sooner rather than later is a good thing. The Ponzi schemes will collapse earlier rather than later, and the opportunity to recover will come earlier rather than later. Who'll be angry about that? All those on the debt-fueled gravy train.

 So as the nation approaches ""a critical demographic milestone"" sooner rather than later is a good thing. The Ponzi schemes will collapse earlier rather than later, and the opportunity to recover will come earlier rather than later. Who'll be angry about that? All those on the debt-fueled gravy train.

 Who'll be angry about that? All those on the debt-fueled gravy train.

Correct. Our economic system depends on an increasing population.Get rid of Social Security and Medicare. Then we'll be okay with a declining population.

Get rid of Social Security and Medicare. Then we'll be okay with a declining population.

This is the dirty little secret about why they opened the border. And Europe/UK has the same problem. As does Japan.
The population is shrinking, which means the economy will also shrink. And our economies must grow just to survive.
It’s a conundrum
I am pretty sure we can make a society and an economy and a democracy that all works with a steady state population. In fact, I’m willing to bet the future of the USA on it!
The globalists view is that it’s easist, not necessarily better, to just keep growing to infinity.
As to Social Security, we each have our own accounts in the Social Security “lockbox,” don’t we?
At some point, we should reach an equilibrium where we don’t need a larger population. I’m not sure why that point isn’t right now. With the advent of AI, automation and so on it’s not like we never needed an ever expanding, workforce, and in fact, employment might be more difficult going forward because of emerging technology.
As long as we stop the Third World from pouring in and having them breed like fricking rabbits on welfare, I see no reason why we can’t just keep our population of current level levels going into the future


Navigation: use the links below to view more comments.
first 1-20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-72 next last


Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.





Free Republic
Browse
  · Search



General/Chat
Topics
  · Post Article





FreeRepublic, LLC, PO BOX 9771, FRESNO, CA 93794


FreeRepublic.com is powered by software copyright 2000-2008 John Robinson



Disclaimer:
    Opinions posted on Free Republic are those of the individual
    posters and do not necessarily represent the opinion of Free Republic or its
    management. All materials posted herein are protected by copyright law and the
    exemption for fair use of copyrighted works.
"
18,2025-09-20,"“The Ig Nobel awards are arguably the highlight of the scientific calendar.” — Nature
—> You can add yourself to the Ig Events mailing list.

The 2025 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 35th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday evening, September 18, 2025, at Boston University, in Massachusetts.  TICKETS to attend the ceremony are now on sale. The ceremony also was livecast.
 LITERATURE PRIZE  [USA]
The late Dr. William B. Bean, for persistently recording and analyzing the rate of growth of one of his fingernails over a period of 35 years.
REFERENCES:
“A Note on Fingernail Growth,” William B. Bean, Journal of Investigative Dermatology, vol. 20, no. 1, January 1953, pp. 27-31. <doi.org/10.1038/jid.1953.5>
“A Discourse on Nail Growth and Unusual Fingernails,” William B. Bean, Transactions of the American Clinical and Climatological Association, vol. 74, 1962; pp. 152-67. <pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2249062>
“Nail Growth. Twenty-Five Years’ Observation,” William B. Bean, Archives of Internal Medicine, vol. 122, no. 4, October 1968, pp. 359-61. <doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1968.00300090069016>
“Nail Growth: 30 Years of Observation,” William B. Bean, Archives of Internal Medicine, vol. 134, no. 3, September 1974, pp. 497-502. <doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1974.00320210107015>
“Some Notes of an Aging Nail Watcher,” William B. Bean, International Journal of Dermatology, vol. 15, no. 3, April 1976, pp. 225-30. <doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-4362.1976.tb00696.x>
“Nail Growth. Thirty-Five Years of Observation,” William B. Bean, Archives of Internal Medicine, vol. 140, no. 1, January 1980, pp. 73-6. <doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1980.00330130075019>
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Bennett Bean (William B. Bean’s son)
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE [POLAND, AUSTRALIA, CANADA]
Marcin Zajenkowski and Gilles Gignac, for investigating what happens when you tell narcissists — or anyone else — that they are intelligent.
REFERENCE: “Telling People They Are Intelligent Correlates with the Feeling of Narcissistic Uniqueness: The Influence of IQ Feedback on Temporary State Narcissism,” Marcin Zajenkowski and Gilles E. Gignac, Intelligence, vol. 89, November–December 2021, 101595. <doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2021.101595>
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Marcin Zajenkowski and Gilles Gignac
NUTRITION PRIZE [NIGERIA, TOGO, ITALY, FRANCE]
Daniele Dendi, Gabriel H. Segniagbeto, Roger Meek, and Luca Luiselli, for studying the extent to which a certain kind of lizard chooses to eat certain kinds of pizza.
REFERENCE: “Opportunistic Foraging Strategy of Rainbow Lizards at a Seaside Resort in Togo,” Daniele Dendi, Gabriel H. Segniagbeto, Roger Meek, and Luca Luiselli, African Journal of Ecology, vol. 61, no. 1, 2023, pp. 226-227. <doi.org/10.1111/aje.13100>
PEDIATRICS PRIZE [USA]
Julie Mennella and Gary Beauchamp, for studying what a nursing baby experiences when the baby’s mother eats garlic.
REFERENCE: “Maternal Diet Alters the Sensory Qualities of Human Milk and the Nursling’s Behavior,” Julie A. Mennella and Gary K. Beauchamp, Pediatrics, vol. 88, no. 4, 1991, pp. 737-744. <pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1896276/>
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Julie Mennella and Gary Beauchamp
BIOLOGY PRIZE [JAPAN]
Tomoki Kojima, Kazato Oishi, Yasushi Matsubara, Yuki Uchiyama, Yoshihiko Fukushima, Naoto Aoki, Say Sato, Tatsuaki Masuda, Junichi Ueda, Hiroyuki Hirooka, and Katsutoshi Kino, for their experiments to learn whether cows painted with zebra-like striping can avoid being bitten by flies.
REFERENCE: “Cows Painted with Zebra-Like Striping Can Avoid Biting Fly Attack,” Tomoki Kojima, Kazato Oishi, Yasushi Matsubara, Yuki Uchiyama, Yoshihiko Fukushima, Naoto Aoki, Say Sato, Tatsuaki Masuda, Junichi Ueda, Hiroyuki Hirooka, and Katsutoshi Kino, PLoS ONE, vol. 14, no. 10, 2019, e0223447. <doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0223447>
NOTE: This prize builds on research (by a team of scientists in Hungary, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland) that was honored with the 2016 Ig Nobel Physics Prize <improbable.com/ig/winners/#ig2016>
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Tomoki Kojima, Kazato Oishi, Say Sato
CHEMISTRY PRIZE [USA, ISRAEL]
Rotem Naftalovich, Daniel Naftalovich, and Frank Greenway, for experiments to test whether eating Teflon [a form of plastic more formally called “polytetrafluoroethylene”] is a good way to increase food volume and hence satiety without increasing calorie content.
REFERENCE: “Polytetrafluoroethylene Ingestion as a Way to Increase Food Volume and Hence Satiety Without Increasing Calorie Content,” Rotem Naftalovich, Daniel Naftalovich, and Frank L. Greenway, Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, vol. 10, no. 4, July 2016, pp. 971–976. <doi.org/10.1177%2F1932296815626726>
REFERENCE: “Use of Nondigestible Nonfibrous Volumizer of Meal Content as a Method for Increasing Feeling of Satiety,” Rotem Naftalovich  and Daniel Naftalovich, U.S. Patent 9,924,736, issued March 27, 2018. <patents.google.com/patent/US9924736B2/en>
PEACE PRIZE [THE NETHERLANDS, UK, GERMANY]
Fritz Renner, Inge Kersbergen, Matt Field, and Jessica Werthmann, for showing that drinking alcohol sometimes improves a person’s ability to speak in a foreign language.
REFERENCE: “Dutch Courage? Effects of Acute Alcohol Consumption on Self-Ratings and Observer Ratings of Foreign Language Skills,” Fritz Renner, Inge Kersbergen, Matt Field, and Jessica Werthmann, Journal of Psychopharmacology, vol. 32, no. 1, 2018, pp. 116-122. <doi.org/10.1177/0269881117735687>
ENGINEERING DESIGN PRIZE [INDIA]
Vikash Kumar and Sarthak Mittal, for analyzing, from an engineering design perspective, how foul-smelling shoes affect the good experience of using a shoe-rack.
REFERENCE: “Smelly Shoes — An Opportunity for Shoe Rack Re-Design,” Vikash Kumar and Sarthak Mittal, Ergonomics for Improved Productivity: Proceedings of HWWE 2017, vol. 2, pp. 287-293. Springer Singapore, 2022. <doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-2229-8_33>
AVIATION PRIZE [COLOMBIA, ISRAEL ARGENTINA, GERMANY, UK, ITALY, USA, PORTUGAL, SPAIN]
Francisco Sánchez, Mariana Melcón, Carmi Korine, and Berry Pinshow, for studying whether ingesting alcohol can impair bats’ ability to fly and also their ability to echolocate.
REFERENCE: “Ethanol Ingestion Affects Flight Performance and Echolocation in Egyptian Fruit Bats,” Francisco Sánchez, Mariana Melcón, Carmi Korine, and Berry Pinshow, Behavioural Processes, vol. 84, no. 2, 2010, pp. 555-558. <doi.org/10.1016/j.beproc.2010.02.006>
CONTACT: Berry Pinshow, Mitrani Department of Desert Ecology, Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 84990 Midreshet Ben-Gurion, Israel.
<pinshow@bgu.ac.il>, Mobile: (+972) 52-8795853.
<https://in.bgu.ac.il/en/bidr/SIDEER/MDDE/Pages/staff/berry-pinshow.aspx&gt;
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Francisco Sánchez
PHYSICS PRIZE [ITALY, SPAIN, GERMANY, AUSTRIA]
Giacomo Bartolucci, Daniel Maria Busiello, Matteo Ciarchi, Alberto Corticelli, Ivan Di Terlizzi, Fabrizio Olmeda, Davide Revignas, and Vincenzo Maria Schimmenti, for discoveries about the physics of pasta sauce, especially the phase transition that can lead to clumping, which can be a cause of unpleasantness.
REFERENCE: “Phase Behavior of Cacio and Pepe Sauce,” Giacomo Bartolucci, Daniel Maria Busiello, Matteo Ciarchi, Alberto Corticelli, Ivan Di Terlizzi, Fabrizio Olmeda, Davide Revignas, and Vincenzo Maria Schimmenti, Physics of Fluids, vol. 37, 2025, article 044122. <doi.org/10.1063/5.0255841>
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Giacomo Bartolucci, Daniel Maria Busiello, Matteo Ciarchi, Ivan Di Terlizzi, Fabrizio Olmeda, Davide Revignas, and Vincenzo Maria Schimmenti

The 2024 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 34th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday evening, September 12, 2024, at MIT (The Massachusetts Institute of Technology) in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  After four pandemic-years in which the ceremony happened only online, this resume dthe tradition of doing it with everyone together in a big room with an audience. We produced the ceremony in collaboration with the MIT Press. The ceremony was webcast.
PEACE PRIZE [USA]
B.F. Skinner, for experiments to see the feasibility of housing live pigeons inside missiles to guide the flight paths of the missiles.
REFERENCE: “Pigeons in a Pelican”, B.F. Skinner, American Psychologist, vol 15, no. 1, 1960, pp. 28-37. <psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/h0045345>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: B.F. Skinner’s daughter, Julie Skinner Vargas
BOTANY PRIZE [GERMANY, BRAZIL, USA]
Jacob White and Felipe Yamashita, for finding evidence that some real plants imitate the shapes of neighboring artificial plastic plants.
REFERENCE: “Boquila trifoliolata Mimics Leaves of an Artificial Plastic Host Plant,” Jacob White and Felipe Yamashita, Plant Signaling and Behavior, vol. 17, no. 1, 2022. <doi.org/10.1080%2F15592324.2021.1977530>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Felipe Yamashita
ANATOMY  PRIZE [FRANCE, CHILE]
Marjolaine Willems, Quentin Hennocq, Sara Tunon de Lara, Nicolas Kogane, Vincent Fleury, Romy Rayssiguier, Juan José Cortés Santander, Roberto Requena, Julien Stirnemann, and Roman Hossein Khonsari, for studying whether the hair on the heads of most people in the northern hemisphere swirls in the same direction (clockwise or counter-clockwise?) as hair on the heads of most people in the southern hemisphere.
REFERENCE: “Genetic Determinism and Hemispheric Influence in Hair Whorl Formation,” Marjolaine Willems, Quentin Hennocq, Sara Tunon de Lara, Nicolas Kogane, Vincent Fleury, Romy Rayssiguier, Juan José Cortés Santander, Roberto Requena, Julien Stirnemann, and Roman Hossein Khonsari, Journal of Stomatology, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, vol. 125, no. 2, April 2024, article 101664. <doi.org/10.1016/j.jormas.2023.101664>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Marjolaine Willems and Roman Khonsari
MEDICINE PRIZE [SWITZERLAND, GERMANY, BELGIUM]
Lieven A. Schenk, Tahmine Fadai, and Christian Büchel, for demonstrating that fake medicine that causes painful side-effects can be more effective than fake medicine that does not cause painful side-effects.
REFERENCE: “How Side Effects Can Improve Treatment Efficacy: A Randomized Trial,” Lieven A. Schenk, Tahmine Fadai, and Christian Büchel, Brain, vol. 147, no. 8, August 2024, pp. 2643–2651. <doi.org/10.1093/brain/awae132>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Lieven Schenk.
PHYSICS PRIZE [USA]
James C. Liao, for demonstrating and explaining the swimming abilities of a dead trout.
REFERENCE: “Neuromuscular Control of Trout Swimming in a Vortex Street: Implications for Energy Economy During the Kármán Gait,” James C. Liao, The Journal of Experimental Biology, vol. 207, 2004, pp. 3495-3506. <doi.org/10.1242/jeb.01125>
REFERENCE: “Passive Propulsion in Vortex Wakes,” David N. Beal, Franz S. Hover, Michael S. Triantafyllou, James C. Liao, and George V. Lauder, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 549, 2006, pp. 385-402.
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: James C. (“Jimmy”) Liao
PHYSIOLOGY PRIZE [JAPAN, USA]
Ryo Okabe, Toyofumi F. Chen-Yoshikawa, Yosuke Yoneyama, Yuhei Yokoyama, Satona Tanaka, Akihiko Yoshizawa, Wendy L. Thompson, Gokul Kannan, Eiji Kobayashi, Hiroshi Date, and Takanori Takebe, for discovering that many mammals are capable of breathing through their anus.
REFERENCE: “Mammalian Enteral Ventilation Ameliorates Respiratory Failure,” Ryo Okabe, Toyofumi F. Chen-Yoshikawa, Yosuke Yoneyama, Yuhei Yokoyama, Satona Tanaka, Akihiko Yoshizawa, Wendy L. Thompson, Gokul Kannan, Eiji Kobayashi, Hiroshi Date, and Takanori Takebe, Med, vol. 2, June 11, 2021, pp. 773-783. <doi.org/10.1016/j.medj.2021.04.004>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Takanori Takebe, Toyofumi Chen-Yoshikawa, Ryo Okabe, Eiji Kobayashi, Yosuke Yoneyama, Yuhei Yokoyama
PROBABILITY PRIZE [THE NETHERLANDS, SWITZERLAND, BELGIUM, FRANCE, GERMANY, HUNGARY, CZECH REPUBLIC]
František Bartoš, Eric-Jan Wagenmakers, Alexandra Sarafoglou, Henrik Godmann, and many colleagues, for showing, both in theory and by 350,757 experiments, that when you flip a coin, it tends to land on the same side as it started.
REFERENCE: “Fair Coins Tend to Land on the Same Side They Started: Evidence from 350,757 Flips,” František Bartoš, et al., arXiv 2310.04153, 2023. <doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.04153>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Frantisek Bartos, and Eric-Jan Wagenmakers
CHEMISTRY PRIZE [THE NETHERLANDS, FRANCE]
Tess Heeremans, Antoine Deblais, Daniel Bonn, and Sander Woutersen, for using chromatography to separate drunk and sober worms.
REFERENCE: “Chromatographic Separation of Active Polymer–Like Worm Mixtures by Contour Length and Activity,” Tess Heeremans, Antoine Deblais, Daniel Bonn, and Sander Woutersen, Science Advances, vol. 8, no. 23, 2022, article eabj7918. <doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abj7918>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Tess Heeremans, Antoine Deblais, Daniel Bonn, Sander Woutersen
DEMOGRAPHY PRIZE [AUSTRALIA, UK]
Saul Justin Newman, for detective work to discover that many of the people famous for having the longest lives lived in places that had lousy birth-and-death recordkeeping.
REFERENCE: “Supercentenarians and the Oldest-Old Are Concentrated into Regions with No Birth Certificates and Short Lifespans,” Saul Justin Newman, BioRxiv, 704080, 2019. <doi.org/10.1101/704080>
REFERENCE: “Supercentenarian and Remarkable Age Records Exhibit Patterns Indicative of Clerical Errors and Pension Fraud,” Saul Justin Newman, BioRxiv, 2024. <doi.org/10.1101/704080>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Saul Justin Newman
BIOLOGY PRIZE [USA]
Fordyce Ely and William E. Petersen, for exploding a paper bag next to a cat that’s standing on the back of a cow, to explore how and when cows spew their milk.
REFERENCE: “Factors Involved in the Ejection of Milk,” Fordyce Ely and W.E. Petersen, Journal of Dairy Science, vol. 3, 1941, pp. 211- 23. <doi.org/10.1093/ansci/1939.1.80>
WHO CAME TO THE CEREMONY: Fordyce Ely’s daughter Jane Ely Wells and grandson Matt Wells
 

The 2023 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 33rd First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday, September 14, 2023. The ceremony was webcast.
CHEMISTRY and GEOLOGY PRIZE [POLAND, UK]
Jan Zalasiewicz, for explaining why many scientists like to lick rocks.
REFERENCE: “Eating Fossils,” Jan Zalasiewicz, The Paleontological Association Newsletter, no. 96, November 2017.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Jan Zalasiewicz
LITERATURE PRIZE [FRANCE, UK, MALAYSIA, FINLAND]
Chris Moulin, Nicole Bell, Merita Turunen, Arina Baharin, and Akira O’Connor for studying the sensations people feel when they repeat a single word many, many, many, many, many, many, many times.
REFERENCE: “The The The The Induction of Jamais Vu in the Laboratory: Word Alienation and Semantic Satiation,” Chris J. A. Moulin, Nicole Bell, Merita Turunen, Arina Baharin, and Akira R. O’Connor, Memory, vol. 29, no. 7, 2021, pp. 933-942.  doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2020.1727519
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Chris Moulin, Akira O’Connor
MECHANICAL ENGINEERING PRIZE [INDIA, CHINA, MALAYSIA, USA]
Te Faye Yap, Zhen Liu, Anoop Rajappan, Trevor Shimokusu, and Daniel Preston, for re-animating dead spiders to use as mechanical gripping tools.
REFERENCE: “Necrobotics: Biotic Materials as Ready-to-Use Actuators,” Te Faye Yap, Zhen Liu, Anoop Rajappan, Trevor J. Shimokusu, and Daniel J. Preston, Advanced Science, vol. 9, no. 29, 2022, article 2201174.  doi.org/10.1002/advs.202201174
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Te Faye Yap and Daniel Preston
PUBLIC HEALTH PRIZE [SOUTH KOREA, USA] Seung-min Park, for inventing the Stanford Toilet, a device that uses a variety of technologies — including a urinalysis dipstick test strip, a computer vision system for defecation analysis, an anal-print sensor paired with an identification camera, and a telecommunications link — to monitor and quickly analyze the substances that humans excrete.
REFERENCE: “A Mountable Toilet System for Personalized Health Monitoring via the Analysis of Excreta,” Seung-min Park, Daeyoun D. Won, Brian J. Lee, Diego Escobedo, Andre Esteva, Amin Aalipour, T. Jessie Ge, et al., Nature Biomedical Engineering, vol. 4, no. 6, 2020, pp. 624-635.  doi.org/10.1038/s41551-020-0534-9
REFERENCE: “Digital Biomarkers in Human Excreta,” Seung-min Park, T. Jessie Ge, Daeyoun D. Won, Jong Kyun Lee, and Joseph C. Liao, Nature Reviews Gastroenterology and Hepatology, vol. 18, no. 8, 2021, pp. 521-522.  doi.org/10.1038/s41575-021-00462-0
REFERENCE: “Smart Toilets for Monitoring COVID-19 Surges: Passive Diagnostics and Public Health,” T. Jessie Ge, Carmel T. Chan, Brian J. Lee, Joseph C. Liao, and Seung-min Park, NPJ Digital Medicine, vol. 5, no. 1, 2022, article 39.  doi.org/10.1038/s41746-022-00582-0
REFERENCE: “Passive Monitoring by Smart Toilets for Precision Health,” T. Jessie Ge, Vasiliki Nataly Rahimzadeh, Kevin Mintz, Walter G. Park, Nicole Martinez-Martin, Joseph C. Liao, and Seung-min Park, Science Translational Medicine, vol. 15, no. 681, 2023, article eabk3489.  doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.abk3489
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Seung-min Park
COMMUNICATION PRIZE [ARGENTINA, SPAIN, COLOMBIA, CHILE, CHINA, USA]
María José Torres-Prioris, Diana López-Barroso, Estela Càmara, Sol Fittipaldi, Lucas Sedeño, Agustín Ibáñez, Marcelo Berthier, and Adolfo García, for studying the mental activities of people who are expert at speaking backward.
REFERENCE: “Neurocognitive Signatures of Phonemic Sequencing in Expert Backward Speakers,” María José Torres-Prioris, Diana López-Barroso, Estela Càmara, Sol Fittipaldi, Lucas Sedeño, Agustín Ibáñez, Marcelo L. Berthier, and Adolfo M. García, Scientific Reports, vol. 10, no. 10621, 2020.  doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-67551-z
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: María José Torres-Prioris, Adolfo García
MEDICINE PRIZE [USA, CANADA, MACEDONIA, IRAN, VIETNAM]
Christine Pham, Bobak Hedayati, Kiana Hashemi, Ella Csuka, Tiana Mamaghani, Margit Juhasz, Jamie Wikenheiser, and Natasha Mesinkovska, for using cadavers to explore whether there is an equal number of hairs in each of a person’s two nostrils.
REFERENCE: “The Quantification and Measurement of Nasal Hairs in a Cadaveric Population,” Christine Pham, Bobak Hedayati, Kiana Hashemi, Ella Csuka, Tiana Mamaghani, Margit Juhasz, Jamie Wikenheiser, and Natasha Mesinkovska, International Journal of Dermatology, vol. 61, no. 11, November 2022, pp. e456-e457. doi.org/10.1111/ijd.15921
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Christine Pham, Natasha Mesinkovska, Margit Juhasz, Kiana Hashemi, Tiana Mamaghani
NUTRITION PRIZE [JAPAN]
Homei Miyashita and Hiromi Nakamura, for experiments to determine how electrified chopsticks and drinking straws can change the taste of food.
REFERENCE: “Augmented Gustation Using Electricity,” Hiromi Nakamura and Homei Miyashita, Proceedings of the 2nd Augmented Human International Conference, March 2011, article 34.  doi.org/10.1145/1959826.1959860
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Homei Miyashita, Hiromi Nakamura
EDUCATION PRIZE [HONG KONG, CHINA, CANADA, UK, THE NETHERLANDS, IRELAND, USA, JAPAN]
Katy Tam, Cyanea Poon, Victoria Hui, Wijnand van Tilburg, Christy Wong, Vivian Kwong, Gigi Yuen, and Christian Chan, for methodically studying the boredom of teachers and students.
REFERENCE: “Boredom Begets Boredom: An Experience Sampling Study on the Impact of Teacher Boredom on Student Boredom and Motivation,” Katy Y.Y. Tam, Cyanea Y. S. Poon, Victoria K.Y. Hui, Christy Y. F. Wong, Vivian W.Y. Kwong, Gigi W.C. Yuen, Christian S. Chan, British Journal of Educational Psychology, vol. 90, no. S1, June 2020, pp. 124-137.  doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12309
REFERENCE: “Whatever Will Bore, Will Bore: The Mere Anticipation of Boredom Exacerbates its Occurrence in Lectures,” Katy Y.Y. Tam, Wijnand A.P. Van Tilburg, Christian S. Chan, British Journal of Educational Psychology, epub 2022.   doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12549
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Christian Chan, Katy Y.Y. Tam, Wijnand A.P. Van Tilburg
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE [USA]
Stanley Milgram, Leonard Bickman, and Lawrence Berkowitz for experiments on a city street to see how many passersby stop to look upward when they see strangers looking upward
REFERENCE: “Note on the Drawing Power of Crowds of Different Size,” Stanley Milgram, Leonard Bickman, and Lawrence Berkowitz, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 13, no. 2, 1969, pp. 79-82. psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/h0028070
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Len Bickman
PHYSICS PRIZE [SPAIN, GALICIA, SWITZERLAND, FRANCE, UK]
Bieito Fernández Castro, Marian Peña, Enrique Nogueira, Miguel Gilcoto, Esperanza Broullón, Antonio Comesaña, Damien Bouffard, Alberto C. Naveira Garabato, and Beatriz Mouriño-Carballido, for measuring the extent to which ocean-water mixing is affected by the sexual activity of anchovies.
REFERENCE: “Intense Upper Ocean Mixing Due to Large Aggregations of Spawning Fish,” Bieito Fernández Castro, Marian Peña, Enrique Nogueira, Miguel Gilcoto, Esperanza Broullón, Antonio Comesaña, Damien Bouffard, Alberto C. Naveira Garabato, and Beatriz Mouriño-Carballido, Nature Geoscience, vol. 15, 2022, pp. 287–292.  doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00916-3
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Bieito Fernandez Castro, Beatriz Mouriño-Carballido, Alberto Naveira Garabato, Esperanza Broullon, Miguel Gil Coto

The 2022 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 32nd First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday, September 15, 2022. The ceremony was webcast.
APPLIED CARDIOLOGY PRIZE [CZECH REPUBLIC, THE NETHERLANDS, UK, SWEDEN, ARUBA]
Eliska Prochazkova, Elio Sjak-Shie, Friederike Behrens, Daniel Lindh, and Mariska Kret, for seeking and finding evidence that when new romantic partners meet for the first time, and feel attracted to each other, their heart rates synchronize.
REFERENCE: “Physiological Synchrony is Associated with Attraction in a Blind Date Setting,” Eliska Prochazkova, Elio Sjak-Shie, Friederike Behrens, Daniel Lindh, and Mariska E. Kret, Nature Human Behaviour, vol. 6, no. 2, 2022, pp. 269-278.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-021-01197-3>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Eliska Prochazkova, Mariska Kret
LITERATURE PRIZE [CANADA, USA, UK, AUSTRALIA]
Eric Martínez, Francis Mollica, and Edward Gibson, for analyzing what makes legal documents unnecessarily difficult to understand.
REFERENCE: “Poor Writing, Not Specialized Concepts, Drives Processing Difficulty in Legal Language,” Eric Martínez, Francis Mollica, and Edward Gibson, Cognition, vol. 224, July 2022, 105070.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2022.105070>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Eric Martínez, Francis Mollica, Edward Gibson
BIOLOGY PRIZE [BRAZIL, COLOMBIA]
Solimary García-Hernández and Glauco Machado, for studying whether and how constipation affects the mating prospects of scorpions.
REFERENCE: “Short- and Long-Term Effects of an Extreme Case of Autotomy: Does ‘Tail’ Loss and Subsequent Constipation Decrease the Locomotor Performance of Male and Female Scorpions?” Solimary García-Hernández and Glauco Machado, Integrative Zoology, epub 2021.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1749-4877.12604>
REFERENCE: “Fitness Implications of Nonlethal Injuries in Scorpions: Females, but Not Males, Pay Reproductive Costs,” Solimary García-Hernández and Glauco Machado, American Naturalist, vol. 197, no. 3, March 2021, pp. 379-389.
<https://doi.org/10.1086/712759>
REFERENCE: ” ‘Tail’ Autotomy and Consequent Stinger Loss Decrease Predation Success in Scorpions,” Solimary García-Hernández and Glauco Machado, Animal Behaviour, vol. 169, 2020, pp. 157-167.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2020.08.019>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Solimary García-Hernández, Glauco Machado
MEDICINE PRIZE [POLAND]
Marcin Jasiński, Martyna Maciejewska, Anna Brodziak, Michał Górka, Kamila Skwierawska, Wiesław Jędrzejczak, Agnieszka Tomaszewska, Grzegorz Basak, and Emilian Snarski, for showing that when patients undergo some forms of toxic chemotherapy, they suffer fewer harmful side effects when ice cream replaces one traditional component of the procedure.
REFERENCE: “Ice-Cream Used as Cryotherapy During High-Dose Melphalan Conditioning Reduces Oral Mucositis After Autologous Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation,” Marcin Jasiński, Martyna Maciejewska, Anna Brodziak, Michał Górka, Kamila Skwierawska, Wiesław W. Jędrzejczak, Agnieszka Tomaszewska, Grzegorz W. Basak, and Emilian Snarski, Scientific Reports, vol. 11, no. 22507, 2021.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-02002-x>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Marcin Jasiński, Anna Brodziak, Kamila Skwierawska, Wiesław Jędrzejczak, Emilian Snarski
ENGINEERING PRIZE [JAPAN]
Gen Matsuzaki, Kazuo Ohuchi, Masaru Uehara, Yoshiyuki Ueno, and Goro Imura, for trying to discover the most efficient way for people to use their fingers when turning a knob.
REFERENCE: “How to Use Fingers during Rotary Control of Columnar Knobs,” Gen Matsuzaki, Kazuo Ohuchi, Masaru Uehara, Yoshiyuki Ueno, and Goro Imura, Bulletin of Japanese Society for the Science of Design, vol. 45, no. 5, 1999, pp. 69-76.
<https://doi.org/10.11247/jssdj.45.69>
REFERENCE: “Experimental Studies on the Rotary Control of Columnar Knobs — The Number of Fingers used at the Time of starting Rotary Control,” Gen Matsuzaki, Goro Imura, and Maseru Uehara, Proceedings of the Third Asia Design Conference, 1998, pp. 37-40.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Gen Matsuzaki
ART HISTORY PRIZE [THE NETHERLANDS, GUATEMALA, USA, AUSTRIA]
Peter de Smet and Nicholas Hellmuth, for their study “A Multidisciplinary Approach to Ritual Enema Scenes on Ancient Maya Pottery.”
REFERENCE: “A Multidisciplinary Approach to Ritual Enema Scenes on Ancient Maya Pottery,” Peter A.G.M. de Smet and Nicholas M. Hellmuth, Journal of Ethnopharmacology, vol. 16, no. 2-3, 1986, pp. 213-262.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-8741(86)90091-7>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Peter de Smet, Nicholas Hellmuth
PHYSICS PRIZE [CHINA, UK, TURKEY, USA] [AWARDED JOINTLY TO TWO GROUPS]
Frank Fish, Zhi-Ming Yuan, Minglu Chen, Laibing Jia, Chunyan Ji, and Atilla Incecik, for trying to understand how ducklings manage to swim in formation.
REFERENCE: “Energy Conservation by Formation Swimming: Metabolic Evidence from Ducklings,” Frank E. Fish, in the book Mechanics and Physiology of Animal Swimming, 1994, pp. 193-204.
<https://www.google.com/books/edition/The_Mechanics_and_Physiology_of_Animal_S/orLvpB-EMgEC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=Energy+Conservation+by+Formation+Swimming:+Metabolic+Evidence+from+Ducklings&pg=PA193&printsec=frontcover>
REFERENCE: “Wave-Riding and Wave-Passing by Ducklings in Formation Swimming,” Zhi-Ming Yuan, Minglu Chen, Laibing Jia, Chunyan Ji, and Atilla Incecik, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 928, no. R2, 2021.
<https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2021.820>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Frank Fish, Zhi-Ming Yuan, Laibing Jia, Chunyan Ji, Atilla Incecik
PEACE PRIZE [CHINA, HUNGARY, CANADA, THE NETHERLANDS, UK, ITALY, AUSTRALIA, SWITZERLAND, USA]
Junhui Wu, Szabolcs Számadó, Pat Barclay, Bianca Beersma, Terence Dores Cruz, Sergio Lo Iacono, Annika Nieper, Kim Peters, Wojtek Przepiorka, Leo Tiokhin and Paul Van Lange, for developing an algorithm to help gossipers decide when to tell the truth and when to lie.
REFERENCE: “Honesty and Dishonesty in Gossip Strategies: A Fitness Interdependence Analysis,” Junhui Wu, Szabolcs Számadó, Pat Barclay, Bianca Beersma, Terence D. Dores Cruz, Sergio Lo Iacono, Annika S. Nieper, Kim Peters, Wojtek Przepiorka, Leo Tiokhin and Paul A.M. Van Lange, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, vol. 376, no. 1838, 2021, 20200300.
<https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0300>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Junhui Wu, Pat Barclay, Bianca Beersma, Terence Dores Cruz, Sergio Lo Iacono, Annika Nieper, Kim Peters, Wojtek Przepiorka, Leo Tiokhin, Paul Van Lange
ECONOMICS PRIZE [ITALY]
Alessandro Pluchino, Alessio Emanuele Biondo, and Andrea Rapisarda, for explaining, mathematically, why success most often goes not to the most talented people, but instead to the luckiest.
REFERENCE: “Talent vs. Luck: The Role of Randomness in Success and Failure,” Alessandro Pluchino, Alessio Emanuele Biondo, and Andrea Rapisarda, Advances in Complex Systems, vol. 21, nos. 3 and 4, 2018.
<https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219525918500145>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Alessandro Pluchino, Alessio Biondo, Andrea Rapisarda
[NOTE: This is the second Ig Nobel Prize awarded to Alessandro Pluchino and Andrea Rapisarda. The 2010 Ig Nobel Prize for Management was awarded to Alessandro Pluchino, Andrea Rapisarda, and Cesare Garofalo, for demonstrating mathematically that organizations would become more efficient if they promoted people at random.]
SAFETY ENGINEERING PRIZE [SWEDEN]
Magnus Gens, for developing a moose crash-test dummy.
REFERENCE: “Moose Crash Test Dummy,” Magnus Gens, Master’s thesis at KTH Royal Institute of Technology, published by the Swedish National Road and Transport Research Institute, 2001.
<https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A673368&dswid=-2909>
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Magnus Gens

The 2021 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 31st First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday, September 9, 2021. The ceremony was webcast.
BIOLOGY PRIZE [SWEDEN]:
Susanne Schötz, Robert Eklund, and Joost van de Weijer, for analyzing variations in purring, chirping, chattering, trilling, tweedling, murmuring, meowing, moaning, squeaking, hissing, yowling, howling, growling, and other modes of cat–human communication.
REFERENCE: “A Comparative Acoustic Analysis of Purring in Four Cats,” Susanne Schötz and Robert Eklund, Proceedings of Fonetik 2011, Speech, Music and Hearing, KTH, Stockholm, TMH-QPSR, 51.
REFERENCE: “A Phonetic Pilot Study of Vocalisations in Three Cats,” Susanne Schötz, Proceedings of Fonetik 2012, Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.
REFERENCE: “A Phonetic Pilot Study of Chirp, Chatter, Tweet and Tweedle in Three Domestic Cats,” Susanne Schötz, Proceedings of Fonetik 2013, Linköping University, Sweden, 2013, pp. 65-68.
REFERENCE: “A Study of Human Perception of Intonation in Domestic Cat Meows,” Susanne Schötz and Joost van de Weijer, Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Speech Prosody, Dubin, Ireland, May 20-23, 2014.
REFERENCE: “Melody in Human–Cat Communication (Meowsic): Origins, Past, Present and Future,” Susanne Schötz, Robert Eklund, and Joost van de Weijer, 2016.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Susanne Schötz
ECOLOGY PRIZE [SPAIN. IRAN]:
Leila Satari, Alba Guillén, Àngela Vidal-Verdú, and Manuel Porcar, for using genetic analysis to identify the different species of bacteria that reside in wads of discarded chewing gum stuck on pavements in various countries.
REFERENCE: “The Wasted Chewing Gum Bacteriome,” Leila Satari, Alba Guillén, Àngela Vidal-Verdú, and Manuel Porcar, Scientific Reports, vol. 10, no. 16846, 2020.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Leila Satari, Alba Guillén, Àngela Vidal-Verdú, Manuel Porcar
CHEMISTRY PRIZE [GERMANY, UK, NEW ZEALAND, GREECE, CYPRUS, AUSTRIA]:
Jörg Wicker, Nicolas Krauter, Bettina Derstroff, Christof Stönner, Efstratios Bourtsoukidis, Achim Edtbauer, Jochen Wulf, Thomas Klüpfel, Stefan Kramer, and Jonathan Williams, for chemically analyzing the air inside movie theaters, to test whether the odors produced by an audience reliably indicate the levels of violence, sex, antisocial behavior, drug use, and bad language in the movie the audience is watching.
REFERENCE: “Proof of Concept Study: Testing Human Volatile Organic Compounds as Tools for Age Classification of Films,” Christof Stönner, Achim Edtbauer, Bettina Derstroff, Efstratios Bourtsoukidis, Thomas Klüpfel, Jörg Wicker, and Jonathan Williams, PLoS ONE, vol. 13, no. 10, 2008, p. e0203044.
REFERENCE: “Cinema Data Mining: The Smell of Fear,” Jörg Wicker, Nicolas Krauter, Bettina Derstorff, Christof Stönner, Efstratios Bourtsoukidis, Thomas Klüpfel, Jonathan Williams, and Stefan Kramer, Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 1295-1304. 2015.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Jörg Wicker, Nicolas Krauter, Bettina Derstroff, Christof Stönner, Efstratios Bourtsoukidis, Achim Edtbauer, Jochen Wulf, Thomas Klüpfel, Stefan Kramer, Jonathan Williams
ECONOMICS PRIZE [FRANCE, SWITZERLAND, AUSTRALIA, AUSTRIA, CZECH REPUBLIC, UK]:
Pavlo Blavatskyy, for discovering that the obesity of a country’s politicians may be a good indicator of that country’s corruption.
REFERENCE: “Obesity of Politicians and Corruption in Post‐Soviet Countries,” Pavlo Blavatskyy, Economic of Transition and Institutional Change, vol. 29, no. 2, 2021, pp. 343-356.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Pavlo Blavatskyy
MEDICINE PRIZE [GERMANY, TURKEY, UK]:
Olcay Cem Bulut, Dare Oladokun, Burkard Lippert, and Ralph Hohenberger, for demonstrating that sexual orgasms can be as effective as decongestant medicines at improving nasal breathing.
REFERENCE: “Can Sex Improve Nasal Function? — An Exploration of the Link Between Sex and Nasal Function,” Olcay Cem Bulut, Dare Oladokun, Burkard M. Lippert, and Ralph Hohenberger, Ear, Nose & Throat Journal, 2021, no. 0145561320981441.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Olcay Cem Bulut, Dare Oladokun, Ralph Hohenberger
PEACE PRIZE [USA]:
Ethan Beseris, Steven Naleway, and David Carrier, for testing the hypothesis that humans evolved beards to protect themselves from punches to the face.
REFERENCE: “Impact Protection Potential of Mammalian Hair: Testing the Pugilism Hypothesis for the Evolution of Human Facial Hair,” Ethan A. Beseris, Steven E. Naleway, David R. Carrier, Integrative Organismal Biology, vol. 2, no. 1, 2020, obaa005.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Ethan Beseris, Steven Naleway, David Carrier
PHYSICS PRIZE [THE NETHERLANDS, ITALY, TAIWAN, USA]:
Alessandro Corbetta, Jasper Meeusen, Chung-min Lee, Roberto Benzi, and Federico Toschi, for conducting experiments to learn why pedestrians do not constantly collide with other pedestrians.
REFERENCE: “Physics-based modeling and data representation of pairwise interactions among pedestrians,” Alessandro Corbetta, Jasper A. Meeusen, Chung-min Lee, Roberto Benzi, and Federico Toschi, Physical Review E, vol. 98, no. 062310, 2018.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Alessandro Corbetta, Jasper Meeusen, Chung-min Lee, Roberto Benzi,, Federico Toschi
KINETICS PRIZE [JAPAN, SWITZERLAND, ITALY]:
Hisashi Murakami, Claudio Feliciani, Yuta Nishiyama, and Katsuhiro Nishinari, for conducting experiments to learn why pedestrians do sometimes collide with other pedestrians.
REFERENCE: “Mutual Anticipation Can Contribute to Self-Organization in Human Crowds,” Hisashi Murakami, Claudio Feliciani, Yuta Nishiyama, and Katsuhiro Nishinari, Science Advances, vol. 7, no. 12, 2021, p. eabe7758.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Hisashi Murakami, Claudio Feliciani, Yuta Nishiyama, Katsuhiro Nishinari
ENTOMOLOGY PRIZE [USA]:
John Mulrennan, Jr., Roger Grothaus, Charles Hammond, and Jay Lamdin, for their research study “A New Method of Cockroach Control on Submarines”.
REFERENCE: “A New Method of Cockroach Control on Submarines,” John A. Mulrennan, Jr., Roger H. Grothaus, Charles L. Hammond, and Jay M. Lamdin, Journal of Economic Entomology, vol. 64, no. 5, October 1971, pp. 1196-8.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: John Mulrennan, Jr.
TRANSPORTATION PRIZE [NAMIBIA, SOUTH AFRICA, TANZANIA, ZIMBABWE, BRAZIL, UK, USA]:
Robin Radcliffe, Mark Jago, Peter Morkel, Estelle Morkel, Pierre du Preez, Piet Beytell, Birgit Kotting, Bakker Manuel, Jan Hendrik du Preez, Michele Miller, Julia Felippe, Stephen Parry, and Robin Gleed, for determining by experiment whether it is safer to transport an airborne rhinoceros upside-down.
REFERENCE: “The Pulmonary and Metabolic Effects of Suspension by the Feet Compared with Lateral Recumbency in Immobilized Black Rhinoceroses (Diceros bicornis) Captured by Aerial Darting,” Robin W. Radcliffe, Mark Jago, Peter vdB Morkel, Estelle Morkel, Pierre du Preez, Piet Beytell, Birgit Kotting, Bakker Manuel, Jan Hendrik du Preez, Michele A. Miller, Julia Felippe, Stephen A Parry; R.D. Gleed, Journal of Wildlife Diseases, vol. 57, no. 2, 2021, 357–367.
WHO TOOK PART IN THE CEREMONY: Pete Morkel, Mark Jago, Robin Gleed, Robin Radcliffe

The 2020 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 30th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday, September 17, 2020. The ceremony was webcast.
ACOUSTICS PRIZE [AUSTRIA, SWEDEN, JAPAN, USA, SWITZERLAND]
Stephan Reber, Takeshi Nishimura, Judith Janisch, Mark Robertson, and Tecumseh Fitch, for inducing a female Chinese alligator to bellow in an airtight chamber filled with helium-enriched air.
REFERENCE: “A Chinese Alligator in Heliox: Formant Frequencies in a Crocodilian,” Stephan A. Reber, Takeshi Nishimura, Judith Janisch, Mark Robertson, and W. Tecumseh Fitch, Journal of Experimental Biology, vol. 218, 2015, pp. 2442-2447.
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE CEREMONY: Stephan Reber, Takeshi Nishimura, Judith Janisch, Mark Robertson, and Tecumseh Fitch
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE [CANADA, USA]
Miranda Giacomin and Nicholas Rule, for devising a method to identify narcissists by examining their eyebrows.
REFERENCE: “Eyebrows Cue Grandiose Narcissism,” Miranda Giacomin and Nicholas O. Rule, Journal of Personality, vol. 87, no. 2, 2019, pp. 373-385.
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE CEREMONY: Miranda Giacomin and Nicholas Rule
PEACE PRIZE [INDIA, PAKISTAN]
The governments of India and Pakistan, for having their diplomats surreptitiously ring each other’s doorbells in the middle of the night, and then run away before anyone had a chance to answer the door.
REFERENCE: Numerous news reports.
PHYSICS PRIZE [AUSTRALIA, UKRAINE, FRANCE, ITALY, GERMANY, UK, SOUTH AFRICA]
Ivan Maksymov and Andrey Pototsky, for determining, experimentally, what happens to the shape of a living earthworm when one vibrates the earthworm at high frequency.
REFERENCE: “Excitation of Faraday-like body waves in vibrated living earthworms,” Ivan S. Maksymov and Andrey Pototsky, bioRxiv 10.1101/868521, December 8, 2019.
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE CEREMONY: Ivan Maksymov and Andrey Pototsky
ECONOMICS PRIZE [UK, POLAND, FRANCE, BRAZIL, CHILE, COLOMBIA, AUSTRALIA, ITALY, NORWAY, ITALY]
Christopher Watkins, Juan David Leongómez, Jeanne Bovet, Agnieszka Żelaźniewicz, Max Korbmacher, Marco Antônio Corrêa Varella, Ana Maria Fernandez, Danielle Wagstaff, and Samuela Bolgan, for trying to quantify the relationship between different countries’ national income inequality and the average amount of mouth-to-mouth kissing.
REFERENCE: “National Income Inequality Predicts Cultural Variation in Mouth to Mouth Kissing,” Christopher D. Watkins, Juan David Leongómez, Jeanne Bovet, Agnieszka Żelaźniewicz, Max Korbmacher, Marco Antônio Corrêa Varella, Ana Maria Fernandez, Danielle Wagstaff, and Samuela Bolgan, Scientific Reports, vol. 9, article no. 6698, 2019.
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE CEREMONY: Christopher Watkins
MANAGEMENT PRIZE [CHINA]
(奚广安) Xi Guang-An, (莫天祥) Mo Tian-Xiang, (杨康生) Yang Kang-Sheng, (杨广生) Yang Guang-Sheng, and (凌显四) Ling Xian Si, five professional hitmen in Guangxi, China, who managed a contract for a hit job (a murder performed for money) in the following way: After accepting payment to perform the murder, Xi Guang-An then instead subcontracted the task to Mo Tian-Xiang, who then instead subcontracted the task to Yang Kang-Sheng, who then instead subcontracted the task to Yang Guang-Sheng, who then instead subcontracted the task to Ling Xian-Si, with each subsequently enlisted hitman receiving a smaller percentage of the fee, and nobody actually performing a murder.
REFERENCE: Numerous news reports and trial documents.
ENTOMOLOGY PRIZE [USA]
Richard Vetter, for collecting evidence that many entomologists (scientists who study insects) are afraid of spiders, which are not insects.
REFERENCE: “Arachnophobic Entomologists: When Two More Legs Makes a Big Difference,” Richard S. Vetter, American Entomologist, vol. 59, no. 3, 2013, pp. 168-175.
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE CEREMONY: Richard Vetter
MEDICINE PRIZE [THE NETHERLANDS, BELGIUM]
Nienke Vulink, Damiaan Denys, and Arnoud van Loon, for diagnosing a long-unrecognized medical condition: Misophonia, the distress at hearing other people make chewing sounds.
REFERENCE: “Misophonia: Diagnostic Criteria for a New Psychiatric Disorder,” Arjan Schroder, Nienke Vulink, and Damiaan Denys, PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 1, 2013, e54706.
REFERENCE: “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy is Effective in Misophonia: An Open Trial,” Arjan E., Schröder, Nienke C. Vulink, Arnoud J. van Loon, and Damiaan A. Denys, Journal of Affective Disorders, vol. 217, 2017, pp. 289-294.
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE CEREMONY: Nienke Vulink, Damiaan Denys, and Arnoud van Loon
MEDICAL EDUCATION PRIZE [BRAZIL, UK, INDIA, MEXICO, BELARUS, USA, TURKEY, RUSSIA, TURKMENISTAN]
Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil, Boris Johnson of the United Kingdom, Narendra Modi of India, Andrés Manuel López Obrador of Mexico, Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus, Donald Trump of the USA, Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey, Vladimir Putin of Russia, and Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow of Turkmenistan, for using the Covid-19 viral pandemic to teach the world that politicians can have a more immediate effect on life and death than scientists and doctors can.
REFERENCE: Numerous news reports.
NOTE: This is the second Ig Nobel Prize awarded to Alexander Lukashenko. In the year 2013, the Ig Nobel Peace Prize was awarded jointly to Alexander Lukashenko, for making it illegal to applaud in public, AND to the Belarus State Police, for arresting a one-armed man for applauding.
MATERIALS SCIENCE PRIZE [USA, UK]
Metin Eren, Michelle Bebber, James Norris, Alyssa Perrone, Ashley Rutkoski, Michael Wilson, and Mary Ann Raghanti, for showing that knives manufactured from frozen human feces do not work well.
REFERENCE: “Experimental Replication Shows Knives Manufactured from Frozen Human Feces Do Not Work,” Metin I. Eren, Michelle R. Bebber, James D. Norris, Alyssa Perrone, Ashley Rutkoski, Michael Wilson, and Mary Ann Raghanti, Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports, vol. 27, no. 102002, October 2019.
WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE CEREMONY: Metin Eren, Michelle Bebber, James Norris, Alyssa Perrone, Ashley Rutkoski, Michael Wilson, and Mary Ann Raghanti

The 2019 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 29th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday, September 12, 2019, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE [ITALY, THE NETHERLANDS]
Silvano Gallus, for collecting evidence that pizza might protect against illness and death, if the pizza is made and eaten in Italy.
REFERENCE: “Does Pizza Protect Against Cancer?“, Silvano Gallus, Cristina Bosetti, Eva Negri, Renato Talamini, Maurizio Montella, Ettore Conti, Silvia Franceschi, and Carlo La Vecchia, International Journal of Cancer, vol. 107, no. 2, November 1, 2003, pp. 283-284.
REFERENCE: “Pizza and Risk of Acute Myocardial Infarction,” Silvano Gallus, A. Tavani, and C. La Vecchia, European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, vol. 58, no. 11, November 2004, pp. 1543-1546.
REFERENCE: “Pizza Consumption and the Risk of Breast, Ovarian and Prostate Cancer,” Silvano Gallus, Renato Talamini, Cristina Bosetti, Eva Negri, Maurizio Montella, Silvia Franceschi, Attilio Giacosa, and Carlo La Vecchia, European Journal of Cancer Prevention, vol. 15, no. 1, February 2006, pp. 74-76.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Silvano Gallus.
 
MEDICAL EDUCATION PRIZE [USA]
Karen Pryor and Theresa McKeon, for using a simple animal-training technique— called “clicker training” —to help new doctors acquire basic surgical skills.
REFERENCE: “Is Teaching Simple Surgical Skills Using an Operant Learning Program More Effective Than Teaching by Demonstration,” I. Martin Levy, Karen W. Pryor, and Theresa R. McKeon, Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research, vol. 474, no. 4, April 2016, pp. 945–955.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY:Karen Pryor and Theresa McKeon
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE [SINGAPORE, AUSTRIA, CHINA, GERMANY, AUSTRALIA, POLAND, USA, BULGARIA]
Ling-Jun Kong, Herbert Crepaz, Agnieszka Górecka, Aleksandra Urbanek, Rainer Dumke, and Tomasz Paterek, for discovering that dead magnetized cockroaches behave differently than living magnetized cockroaches.
REFERENCE: “In-Vivo Biomagnetic Characterisation of the American Cockroach,” Ling-Jun Kong, Herbert Crepaz, Agnieszka Górecka, Aleksandra Urbanek, Rainer Dumke, Tomasz Paterek, Scientific Reports, vol. 8, no. 1, 2018: 5140.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Tomasz Paterek, Herbert Crepaz, Rainer Dumke.
 
ANATOMY PRIZE [FRANCE]
Roger Mieusset and Bourras Bengoudifa, for measuring scrotal temperature asymmetry in naked and clothed postmen in France.
REFERENCE: “Thermal Asymmetry of the Human Scrotum,” Bourras Bengoudifa and Roger Mieusset, Human Reproduction, vol. 22, no. 8, 2007, pp. 2178-2182.
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE [JAPAN]
Shigeru Watanabe, Mineko Ohnishi, Kaori Imai, Eiji Kawano, and Seiji Igarashi, for estimating the total saliva volume produced per day by a typical five-year-old child
REFERENCE: “Estimation of the Total Saliva Volume Produced Per Day in Five-Year-Old Children,” Shigeru Watanabe, M. Ohnishi, K. Imai, E. Kawano, and S. Igarashi, Archives of Oral Biology, vol. 40, no. 8, August 1995, pp. 781-782.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Shiguru Watanabe [and his adult sons, who were some of the subjects of the study when they were children 35 years ago]
 
ENGINEERING PRIZE [IRAN]
Iman Farahbakhsh, for inventing a diaper-changing machine for use on human infants.
REFERENCE: “Infant Washer and Diaper-Changer Apparatus and Method,” US patent 10034582, granted to Iman Farahbakhsh, July 31, 2018.
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE [TURKEY, THE NETHERLANDS, GERMANY]
Habip Gedik, Timothy A. Voss, and Andreas Voss, for testing which country’s paper money is best at transmitting dangerous bacteria.
REFERENCE: “Money and Transmission of Bacteria,” Habip Gedik, Timothy A. Voss, and Andreas Voss, Antimicrobial Resistance and Infection Control, vol. 2, no. 2, 2013.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Andreas Voss and Timothy Voss (who are father and son)
 
PEACE PRIZE [UK, SAUDI ARABIA, SINGAPORE, USA]
Ghada A. bin Saif, Alexandru Papoiu, Liliana Banari, Francis McGlone, Shawn G. Kwatra, Yiong-Huak Chan, and Gil Yosipovitch, for trying to measure the pleasurability of scratching an itch.
REFERENCE: “The Pleasurability of Scratching an Itch: A Psychophysical and Topographical Assessment,” G.A. bin Saif, A.D.P. Papoiu, L. Banari, F. McGlone, S.G. Kwatra, Y.-H. Chan and G. Yosipovitch, British Journal of Dermatology, vol. 166, no. 5, 2012, pp. 981-985.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Francis McGlone delivered an acceptance speech via recorded video.
 
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE [GERMANY]
Fritz Strack, for discovering that holding a pen in one’s mouth makes one smile, which makes one happier — and for then discovering that it does not.
REFERENCE: “Inhibiting and facilitating conditions of the human smile: a nonobtrusive test of the facial feedback hypothesis,” Fritz Strack, Leonard L. Martin, and Sabine Stepper, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 54, no. 5, 1988, pp. 768-777.
REFERENCE: “From Data to Truth in Psychological Science. A Personal Perspective,” Fritz Strack, Frontiers in Psychology, May 16, 2017.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Fritz Strack.
 
PHYSICS PRIZE [USA, TAIWAN, AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, SWEDEN, UK]
Patricia Yang, Alexander Lee, Miles Chan, Alynn Martin, Ashley Edwards, Scott Carver, and David Hu, for studying how, and why, wombats make cube-shaped poo.
REFERENCE: “How Do Wombats Make Cubed Poo?” Patricia J. Yang, Miles Chan, Scott Carver, and David L. Hu, paper presented at the 71st Annual Meeting of the APS Division of Fluid Dynamics, Abstract: E19.0000, November 18–20, 2018
REFERENCE: “Intestines of Non-Uniform Stiffness Mold the Corners of Wombat Feces,” Patricia J. Yang, Alexander B. Lee, Miles Chan, Michael Kowalski, Kelly Qiu, Christopher Waid, Gabriel Cervantes Benjamin Magondu, Morgan Biagioni, Larry Vogelnest, Alynn Martin, Ashley Edwards, Scott Carver, and David L. Hu, Soft Matter, vol. 3, 2021
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Patricia Yang, David Hu, Miles Chan, Alexander Lee, Scott Carver, Ashley Edwards
NOTE: This is the SECOND Ig Nobel Prize awarded to Patricia Yang and David Hu. They and two other colleagues shared the 2015 Ig Nobel Physics Prize, for testing the biological principle that nearly all mammals empty their bladders in about 21 seconds (plus or minus 13 seconds)
 

The 2018 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 28th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize ceremony, on Thursday, September 13, 2018, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast.
MEDICINE PRIZE [USA] — Marc Mitchell and David Wartinger, for using roller coaster rides to try to hasten the passage of kidney stones.
REFERENCE: “Validation of a Functional Pyelocalyceal Renal Model for the Evaluation of Renal Calculi Passage While Riding a Roller Coaster,” Marc A. Mitchell, David D. Wartinger, The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association, vol. 116, October 2016, pp. 647-652.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Dave Wartinger
 
ANTHROPOLOGY PRIZE [SWEDEN, ROMANIA, DENMARK, THE NETHERLANDS, GERMANY, UK, INDONESIA, ITALY] — Tomas Persson, Gabriela-Alina Sauciuc, and Elainie Madsen, for collecting evidence, in a zoo, that chimpanzees imitate humans about as often, and about as well, as humans imitate chimpanzees.
REFERENCE: “Spontaneous Cross-Species Imitation in Interaction Between Chimpanzees and Zoo Visitors,” Tomas Persson, Gabriela-Alina Sauciuc, and Elainie Madsen, Primates, vol. 59, no. 1, January 2018, pp 19–29.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Tomas Persson, Gabriela-Alina Sauciuc
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE [SWEDEN, COLOMBIA, GERMANY, FRANCE, SWITZERLAND] — Paul Becher, Sebastien Lebreton, Erika Wallin, Erik Hedenstrom, Felipe Borrero-Echeverry, Marie Bengtsson, Volker Jorger, and Peter Witzgall, for demonstrating that wine experts can reliably identify, by smell, the presence of a single fly in a glass of wine.
REFERENCE: “The Scent of the Fly,” Paul G. Becher, Sebastien Lebreton, Erika A. Wallin, Erik Hedenstrom, Felipe Borrero-Echeverry, Marie Bengtsson, Volker Jorger, and Peter Witzgall, bioRxiv, no. 20637, 2017.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Paul Becher, Sebastien Lebreton, Felipe Borrero-Echeverry, Peter Witzgall
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE [PORTUGAL] — Paula Romão, Adília Alarcão and the late César Viana, for measuring the degree to which human saliva is a good cleaning agent for dirty surfaces.
REFERENCE: “Human Saliva as a Cleaning Agent for Dirty Surfaces,” by Paula M. S. Romão, Adília M. Alarcão and César A.N. Viana, Studies in Conservation, vol. 35, 1990, pp. 153-155.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: The winners delivered their acceptance speech via recorded video.
 
MEDICAL EDUCATION PRIZE [JAPAN] — Akira Horiuchi, for the medical report “Colonoscopy in the Sitting Position: Lessons Learned From Self-Colonoscopy.”
REFERENCE: “Colonoscopy in the Sitting Position: Lessons Learned From Self-Colonoscopy by Using a Small-Caliber, Variable-Stiffness Colonoscope,” Akira Horiuchi and Yoshiko Nakayama, Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 63, No. 1, 2006, pp. 119-20.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Akira Horiuchi
 
LITERATURE PRIZE [AUSTRALIA, EL SALVADOR, UK] — Thea Blackler, Rafael Gomez, Vesna Popovic and M. Helen Thompson, for documenting that most people who use complicated products do not read the instruction manual.
REFERENCE: “Life Is Too Short to RTFM: How Users Relate to Documentation and Excess Features in Consumer Products,” Alethea L. Blackler, Rafael Gomez, Vesna Popovic and M. Helen Thompson, Interacting With Computers, vol. 28, no. 1, 2014, pp. 27-46.
WHO PLANS TO ATTEND THE CEREMONY: Thea Blackler
 
NUTRITION PRIZE [ZIMBABWE, TANZANIA, UK] — James Cole, for calculating that the caloric intake from a human-cannibalism diet is significantly lower than the caloric intake from most other traditional meat diets.
REFERENCE: “Assessing the Calorific Significance of Episodes of Human Cannibalism in the Paleolithic,” James Cole, Scientific Reports, vol. 7, no. 44707, April 7, 2017.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: James Cole
 
PEACE PRIZE [SPAIN, COLOMBIA] — Francisco Alonso, Cristina Esteban, Andrea Serge, Maria-Luisa Ballestar, Jaime Sanmartín, Constanza Calatayud, and Beatriz Alamar, for measuring the frequency, motivation, and effects of shouting and cursing while driving an automobile.
REFERENCE: “Shouting and Cursing While Driving: Frequency, Reasons, Perceived Risk and Punishment,” Francisco Alonso, Cristina Esteban, Andrea Serge and Maria-Luisa Ballestar, Journal of Sociology and Anthropology, vol. 1, no. 12017, pp. 1-7.
REFERENCE: “La Justicia en el Tráfico: Conocimiento y Valoración de la Población Española” [“Justice in Traffic: Knowledge and Valuation of the Spanish Population”)], F. Alonso, J. Sanmartín, C. Calatayud, C. Esteban, B. Alamar, and M. L. Ballestar, Cuadernos de Reflexión Attitudes, 2005.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Francisco Alonso
 
REPRODUCTIVE MEDICINE PRIZE [USA, JAPAN, SAUDI ARABIA, EGYPT, INDIA, BANGLADESH] — John Barry, Bruce Blank, and Michel Boileau, for using postage stamps to test whether the male sexual organ is functioning properly—as described in their study “Nocturnal Penile Tumescence Monitoring With Stamps.”
REFERENCE: “Nocturnal Penile Tumescence Monitoring With Stamps,” John M. Barry, Bruce Blank, Michael Boileau, Urology, vol. 15, 1980, pp. 171-172.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: John M. Barry, Bruce Blank, Michel Boileau
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE [CANADA, CHINA, SINGAPORE, USA] — Lindie Hanyu Liang, Douglas Brown, Huiwen Lian, Samuel Hanig, D. Lance Ferris, and Lisa Keeping, for investigating whether it is effective for employees to use Voodoo dolls to retaliate against abusive bosses.
REFERENCE: “Righting a Wrong: Retaliation on a Voodoo Doll Symbolizing an Abusive Supervisor Restores Justice,” Lindie Hanyu Liang, Douglas J. Brown, Huiwen Lian, Samuel Hanig, D. Lance Ferris, and Lisa M. Keeping, The Leadership Quarterly, February 2018.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Hanyu Liang, Douglas J. Brown, Huiwen Lian, D. Lance Ferris, and Lisa M. Keeping
 

The 2017 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 14, 2017 at the 27th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast .
PHYSICS PRIZE [FRANCE, SINGAPORE, USA] — Marc-Antoine Fardin, for using fluid dynamics to probe the question “Can a Cat Be Both a Solid and a Liquid?”
REFERENCE: “On the Rheology of Cats,” Marc-Antoine Fardin, Rheology Bulletin, vol. 83, 2, July 2014, pp. 16-17 and 30.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Marc-Antoine Fardin
 
PEACE PRIZE [SWITZERLAND, CANADA, THE NETHERLANDS, USA] — Milo Puhan, Alex Suarez, Christian Lo Cascio, Alfred Zahn, Markus Heitz, and Otto Braendli, for demonstrating that regular playing of a didgeridoo is an effective treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea and snoring.
REFERENCE: “Didgeridoo Playing as Alternative Treatment for Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Syndrome: Randomised Controlled Trial,” Milo A. Puhan, Alex Suarez, Christian Lo Cascio, Alfred Zahn, Markus Heitz and Otto Braendli, BMJ, vol. 332 December 2006.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Milo Puhan, Christian Lo Cascio, Markus Heitz, Alex Suarez. NOTE: Alex Suarez was the first patient, and was the inspiration for the study.
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE [AUSTRALIA, USA] — Matthew Rockloff and Nancy Greer, for their experiments to see how contact with a live crocodile affects a person’s willingness to gamble.
REFERENCE: “Never Smile at a Crocodile: Betting on Electronic Gaming Machines is Intensified by Reptile-Induced Arousal,” Matthew J. Rockloff and Nancy Greer, Journal of Gambling Studies, vol. 26, no. 4, December 2010, pp. 571-81.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Matthew Rockloff and Nancy Greer
 
ANATOMY PRIZE [UK] — James Heathcote, for his medical research study “Why Do Old Men Have Big Ears?”
REFERENCE: “Why Do Old Men Have Big Ears?” James A. Heathcote, British Medical Journal, vol. 311, 1995, p. 1668.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: James Heathcote
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE [JAPAN, BRAZIL, SWITZERLAND] — Kazunori Yoshizawa, Rodrigo Ferreira, Yoshitaka Kamimura, and Charles Lienhard, for their discovery of a female penis, and a male vagina, in a cave insect.
REFERENCE: “Female Penis, Male Vagina and Their Correlated Evolution in a Cave Insect,” Kazunori Yoshizawa, Rodrigo L. Ferreira, Yoshitaka Kamimura, Charles Lienhard, Current Biology, vol. 24, no. 9, 2014, pp. 1006-1010.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: They delivered a short video acceptance speech, filmed in a cave.
 
FLUID DYNAMICS PRIZE [SOUTH KOREA, USA] — Jiwon Han, for studying the dynamics of liquid-sloshing, to learn what happens when a person walks backwards while carrying a cup of coffee. REFERENCE: “A Study on the Coffee Spilling Phenomena in the Low Impulse Regime,” Jiwon Han, Achievements in the Life Sciences, vol. 10, no. 1, 2016, pp. 87-101.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Jiwon (“Jesse”) Han
NOTE: Jiwon Han was a high school student when he wrote the paper, at Korean Minjok Leadership Academy, Gangwon-do, Republic of Korea.
 
NUTRITION PRIZE [BRAZIL, CANADA, SPAIN] — Fernanda Ito, Enrico Bernard, and Rodrigo Torres, for the first scientific report of human blood in the diet of the hairy-legged vampire bat
REFERENCE: “What is for Dinner? First Report of Human Blood in the Diet of the Hairy-Legged Vampire Bat Diphylla ecaudata,” Fernanda Ito, Enrico Bernard, and Rodrigo A. Torres, Acta Chiropterologica, vol. 18, no. 2, December 2016, pp. 509-515.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: The winners delivered their acceptance speech via recorded video.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE [FRANCE, UK] — Jean-Pierre Royet, David Meunier, Nicolas Torquet, Anne-Marie Mouly, and Tao Jiang, for using advanced brain-scanning technology to measure the extent to which some people are disgusted by cheese.
REFERENCE: “The Neural Bases of Disgust for Cheese: An fMRI Study,” Jean-Pierre Royet, David Meunier, Nicolas Torquet, Anne-Marie Mouly and Tao Jiang, Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, vol. 10, October 2016, article 511.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: The winners delivered their acceptance speech via recorded video.
 
COGNITION PRIZE [ITALY, SPAIN, UK] — Matteo Martini, Ilaria Bufalari, Maria Antonietta Stazi, and Salvatore Maria Aglioti, for demonstrating that many identical twins cannot tell themselves apart visually.
REFERENCE: “Is That Me or My Twin? Lack of Self-Face Recognition Advantage in Identical Twins,” Matteo Martini, Ilaria Bufalari, Maria Antonietta Stazi, Salvatore Maria Aglioti, PLoS ONE, vol. 10, no. 4, 2015: e0120900.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Matteo Martini, Ilaria Bufalari
 
OBSTETRICS PRIZE — [SPAIN] — Marisa López-Teijón, Álex García-Faura, Alberto Prats-Galino, and Luis Pallarés Aniorte, for showing that a developing human fetus responds more strongly to music that is played electromechanically inside the mother’s vagina than to music that is played electromechanically on the mother’s belly.
REFERENCE: “Fetal Facial Expression in Response to Intravaginal Music Emission,” Marisa López-Teijón, Álex García-Faura, and Alberto Prats-Galino, Ultrasound, November 2015, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 216–223.
REFERENCE: “Fetal Acoustic Stimulation Device,” patent ES2546919B1, granted September 29, 2015 to Luis y Pallarés Aniorte and Maria Luisa López-Teijón Pérez.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Marisa López-Teijón, Álex García-Faura, Alberto Prats-Galino, and Luis Pallarés Aniorte
NOTE: They also offer a product based on this research The product is named “Babypod“.
 

The 2016 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 22, 2016 at the 26th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast .
REPRODUCTION PRIZE [EGYPT] — The late Ahmed Shafik, for studying the effects of wearing polyester, cotton, or wool trousers on the sex life of rats, and for conducting similar tests with human males.
REFERENCE: “Effect of Different Types of Textiles on Sexual Activity. Experimental study,” Ahmed Shafik, European Urology, vol. 24, no. 3, 1993, pp. 375-80.
REFERENCE: “Contraceptive Efficacy of Polyester-Induced Azoospermia in Normal Men,” Ahmed Shafik, Contraception, vol. 45, 1992, pp. 439-451.
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE [NEW ZEALAND, UK] — Mark Avis, Sarah Forbes, and Shelagh Ferguson, for assessing the perceived personalities of rocks, from a sales and marketing perspective.
REFERENCE: “The Brand Personality of Rocks: A Critical Evaluation of a Brand Personality Scale,” Mark Avis, Sarah Forbes ,and Shelagh Ferguson, Marketing Theory, vol. 14, no. 4, 2014, pp. 451-475.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Mark Avis and Sarah Forbes
 
PHYSICS PRIZE [HUNGARY, SPAIN, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND] — Gábor Horváth, Miklós Blahó, György Kriska, Ramón Hegedüs, Balázs Gerics, Róbert Farkas, Susanne Åkesson, Péter Malik, and Hansruedi Wildermuth, for discovering why white-haired horses are the most horsefly-proof horses, and for discovering why dragonflies are fatally attracted to black tombstones.
REFERENCE: “An Unexpected Advantage of Whiteness in Horses: The Most Horsefly-Proof Horse Has a Depolarizing White Coat,” Gábor Horváth, Miklós Blahó, György Kriska, Ramón Hegedüs, Balázs Gerics, Róbert Farkas and Susanne Åkesson, Proceedings of the Royal Society B, vol. 277 no. 1688, pp. June 2010, pp. 1643-1650.
REFERENCE: “Ecological Traps for Dragonflies in a Cemetery: The Attraction of Sympetrum species (Odonata: Libellulidae) by Horizontally Polarizing Black Grave-Stones,” Gábor Horváth, Péter Malik, György Kriska, Hansruedi Wildermuth, Freshwater Biology, vol. 52, vol. 9, September 2007, pp. 1700–9.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Susanne Åkesson
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE [GERMANY] — Volkswagen, for solving the problem of excessive automobile pollution emissions by automatically, electromechanically producing fewer emissions whenever the cars are being tested.
REFERENCE: “EPA, California Notify Volkswagen of Clean Air Act Violations“, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency news release, September 18, 2015.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE [GERMANY] — Christoph Helmchen, Carina Palzer, Thomas Münte, Silke Anders, and Andreas Sprenger, for discovering that if you have an itch on the left side of your body, you can relieve it by looking into a mirror and scratching the right side of your body (and vice versa).
REFERENCE: “Itch Relief by Mirror Scratching. A Psychophysical Study,” Christoph Helmchen, Carina Palzer, Thomas F. Münte, Silke Anders, Andreas Sprenger, PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no 12, December 26, 2013, e82756.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Andreas Sprenger
 
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE [BELGIUM, THE NETHERLANDS, GERMANY, CANADA, USA] — Evelyne Debey, Maarten De Schryver, Gordon Logan, Kristina Suchotzki, and Bruno Verschuere, for asking a thousand liars how often they lie, and for deciding whether to believe those answers.
REFERENCE: “From Junior to Senior Pinocchio: A Cross-Sectional Lifespan Investigation of Deception,” Evelyne Debey, Maarten De Schryver, Gordon D. Logan, Kristina Suchotzki, and Bruno Verschuere, Acta Psychologica, vol. 160, 2015, pp. 58-68.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Bruno Verschuere
 
PEACE PRIZE [CANADA, USA] — Gordon Pennycook, James Allan Cheyne, Nathaniel Barr, Derek Koehler, and Jonathan Fugelsang for their scholarly study called “On the Reception and Detection of Pseudo-Profound Bullshit”.
REFERENCE: “On the Reception and Detection of Pseudo-Profound Bullshit,” Gordon Pennycook, James Allan Cheyne, Nathaniel Barr, Derek J. Koehler, and Jonathan A. Fugelsang, Judgment and Decision Making, Vol. 10, No. 6, November 2015, pp. 549–563.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Gordon Pennycook, Nathaniel Barr, Derek Koehler, and Jonathan Fugelsang
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE [UK] — Awarded jointly to: Charles Foster, for living in the wild as, at different times, a badger, an otter, a deer, a fox, and a bird; and to Thomas Thwaites, for creating prosthetic extensions of his limbs that allowed him to move in the manner of, and spend time roaming hills in the company of, goats.
REFERENCE: GoatMan; How I Took a Holiday from Being Human, Thomas Thwaites, Princeton Architectural Press, 2016, ISBN 978-1616894054.
REFERENCE: Being a Beast, by Charles Foster, Profile Books, 2016, ISBN 978-1781255346.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Charles Foster, Thomas Thwaites. [NOTE: Thomas Thwaites’s goat suit was kindly released for Ig Nobel purposes from the exhibition ‘Platform – Body/Space’ at Het Nieuwe Instituut in Rotterdam, and will be back on display at the museum from 4 October 2016 till 8 January 2017.]
 
LITERATURE PRIZE [SWEDEN] — Fredrik Sjöberg, for his three-volume autobiographical work about the pleasures of collecting flies that are dead, and flies that are not yet dead.
REFERENCE: The Fly Trap is the first volume of Fredrik Sjöberg’s autobiographical trilogy, En flugsamlares väg (“The Path of a Fly Collector”), and the first to be published in English. Pantheon Books, 2015, ISBN 978-1101870150.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Fredrik Sjöberg
 
PERCEPTION PRIZE [JAPAN] — Atsuki Higashiyama and Kohei Adachi, for investigating whether things look different when you bend over and view them between your legs.
REFERENCE: “Perceived size and Perceived Distance of Targets Viewed From Between the Legs: Evidence for Proprioceptive Theory,” Atsuki Higashiyama and Kohei Adachi, Vision Research, vol. 46, no. 23, November 2006, pp. 3961–76.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Atsuki Higashiyama

The 2015 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 17th, 2015 at the 25th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast.
CHEMISTRY PRIZE — Callum Ormonde and Colin Raston [AUSTRALIA], and Tom Yuan, Stephan Kudlacek, Sameeran Kunche, Joshua N. Smith, William A. Brown, Kaitlin Pugliese, Tivoli Olsen, Mariam Iftikhar, Gregory Weiss [USA], for inventing a chemical recipe to partially un-boil an egg.
REFERENCE: “Shear-Stress-Mediated Refolding of Proteins from Aggregates and Inclusion Bodies,” Tom Z. Yuan, Callum F. G. Ormonde, Stephan T. Kudlacek, Sameeran Kunche, Joshua N. Smith, William A. Brown, Kaitlin M. Pugliese, Tivoli J. Olsen, Mariam Iftikhar, Colin L. Raston, Gregory A. Weiss, ChemBioChem, vol. 16, no. 3, February 9, 2015, pp. 393–396.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Callum Ormonde, Tivoli Olsen, Colin Raston, Greg Weis
 
PHYSICS PRIZE — Patricia Yang [USA and TAIWAN], David Hu [USA and TAIWAN], and Jonathan Pham, Jerome Choo [USA], for testing the biological principle that nearly all mammals empty their bladders in about 21 seconds (plus or minus 13 seconds).
REFERENCE: “Duration of Urination Does Not Change With Body Size,” Patricia J. Yang, Jonathan Pham, Jerome Choo, and David L. Hu, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 111 no. 33, August 19, 2014, pp. 11932–11937.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Patricia Yang, David Hu, Jonathan Pham, Jerome Choo
 
LITERATURE PRIZE — Mark Dingemanse [THE NETHERLANDS, USA], Francisco Torreira [SPAIN, THE NETHERLANDS, BELGIUM, USA, CANADA], and Nick J. Enfield [AUSTRALIA, THE NETHERLANDS], for discovering that the word “huh?” (or its equivalent) seems to exist in every human language — and for not being completely sure why.
REFERENCE: “Is ‘Huh?’ a universal word? Conversational infrastructure and the convergent evolution of linguistic items,” Mark Dingemanse, Francisco Torreira, and Nick J. Enfield, PLOS ONE, 2013. [a video accompanies the paper.]
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: The authors were unable to attend the ceremony; they sent a video acceptance speech. They received their prize at a special event (The European Ig Nobel Show) in Amsterdam, The Netherlands on October 3.
 
MANAGEMENT PRIZE — Gennaro Bernile [ITALY, SINGAPORE, USA], Vineet Bhagwat [USA, INDIA], and P. Raghavendra Rau [UK, INDIA, FRANCE, LUXEMBOURG, GERMANY, JAPAN], for discovering that many business leaders developed during childhood a fondness for risk-taking, when they experienced natural disasters (such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, and wildfires) that — for them — had no dire personal consequences.
REFERENCE: “What Doesn’t Kill You Will Only Make You More Risk-Loving: Early-Life Disasters and CEO Behavior,” Gennaro Bernile, Vineet Bhagwat, and P. Raghavendra Rau, later published in The Journal of Finance, vol. 72, no. 1, 2017, pp. 167-206.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Gennaro Bernile and P. Raghavendra Rau
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE — The Bangkok Metropolitan Police [THAILAND], for offering to pay policemen extra cash if the policemen refuse to take bribes.
REFERENCE: Numerous news reports.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE — Awarded jointly to two groups: Hajime Kimata [JAPAN, CHINA]; and to Jaroslava Durdiaková [SLOVAKIA, US, UK], Peter Celec [SLOVAKIA, GERMANY], Natália Kamodyová, Tatiana Sedláčková, Gabriela Repiská, Barbara Sviežená, and Gabriel Minárik [SLOVAKIA], for experiments to study the biomedical benefits or biomedical consequences of intense kissing (and other intimate, interpersonal activities).
REFERENCE: “Kissing Reduces Allergic Skin Wheal Responses and Plasma Neurotrophin Levels,” Hajime Kimata, Physiology and Behavior, vol. 80, nos. 2-3, November 2003, pp. 395-8.
REFERENCE: “Reduction of Allergic Skin Weal Responses by Sexual Intercourse in Allergic Patients,” Hajime Kimata, Sexual and Relationship Therapy, vol 19, no. 2, May 2004, pp. 151-4.
REFERENCE: “Kissing Selectively Decreases Allergen-Specific IgE Production in Atopic Patients,” Hajime Kimata, Journal of Psychosomatic Research, vol. 60, 2006, pp. 545– 547.
REFERENCE: “Prevalence and Persistence of Male DNA Identified in Mixed Saliva Samples After Intense Kissing,” Natália Kamodyová, Jaroslava Durdiaková, Peter Celec, Tatiana Sedláčková, Gabriela Repiská, Barbara Sviežená, and Gabriel Minárik, Forensic Science International Genetics, vol. 7, no. 1, January 2013, pp. 124–8.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Jaroslava Durdiaková and Peter Celec will be at the ceremony. Hajime Kimata will be at the Ig Informal Lectures, on Saturday, Sept 19 (a prior commmitment prevented him from attending the Thursday ceremony); he sent a video acceptence speech which was played at the Thursday night ceremony.
 
MATHEMATICS PRIZE — Elisabeth Oberzaucher [AUSTRIA, GERMANY, UK] and Karl Grammer [AUSTRIA, GERMANY], for trying to use mathematical techniques to determine whether and how Moulay Ismael the Bloodthirsty, the Sharifian Emperor of Morocco, managed, during the years from 1697 through 1727, to father 888 children.
REFERENCE: “The Case of Moulay Ismael-Fact or Fancy?” Elisabeth Oberzaucher and Karl Grammer, PLOS ONE, vol. 9, no. 2, 2014, e85292.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Elisabeth Oberzaucher
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE — Bruno Grossi, Omar Larach, Mauricio Canals, Rodrigo A. Vásquez [CHILE], José Iriarte-Díaz [CHILE, USA], for observing that when you attach a weighted stick to the rear end of a chicken, the chicken then walks in a manner similar to that in which dinosaurs are thought to have walked.
REFERENCE: “Walking Like Dinosaurs: Chickens with Artificial Tails Provide Clues about Non-Avian Theropod Locomotion,” Bruno Grossi, José Iriarte-Díaz, Omar Larach, Mauricio Canals, Rodrigo A. Vásquez, PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 2, 2014, e88458. [NOTE: The paper is accompanied by a video.>
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Bruno Grossi, José Iriarte-Díaz, Omar Larach, Rodrigo A. Vásquez
DIAGNOSTIC MEDICINE PRIZE — Diallah Karim [CANADA, UK], Anthony Harnden [NEW ZEALAND, UK, US], Nigel D’Souza [BAHRAIN, BELGIUM, DUBAI, INDIA, SOUTH AFRICA, US, UK], Andrew Huang [CHINA, UK], Abdel Kader Allouni [SYRIA, UK], Helen Ashdown [UK], Richard J. Stevens [UK], and Simon Kreckler [UK], for determining that acute appendicitis can be accurately diagnosed by the amount of pain evident when the patient is driven over speed bumps.
REFERENCE: “Pain Over Speed Bumps in Diagnosis of Acute Appendicitis: Diagnostic Accuracy Study,” Helen F. Ashdown, Nigel D’Souza, Diallah Karim, Richard J. Stevens, Andrew Huang, and Anthony Harnden, BMJ, vol. 345, 2012, e8012.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Diallah Karim, Anthony Harnden, Helen Ashdown, Nigel D’Souza, Abdel Kader Allouni
PHYSIOLOGY and ENTOMOLOGY PRIZE — Awarded jointly to two individuals: Justin Schmidt [USA, CANADA], for painstakingly creating the Schmidt Sting Pain Index, which rates the relative pain people feel when stung by various insects; and to Michael L. Smith [PANAMA, US, UK, THE NETHERLANDS], for carefully arranging for honey bees to sting him repeatedly on 25 different locations on his body, to learn which locations are the least painful (the skull, middle toe tip, and upper arm). and which are the most painful (the nostril, upper lip, and penis shaft).
REFERENCE: “Hemolytic Activities of Stinging Insect Venoms,” Justin O. Schmidt, Murray S. Blum, and William L. Overal, Archives of Insect Biochemistry and Physiology, vol. 1, no. 2, 1983, pp. 155-160.
REFERENCE: “Honey Bee Sting Pain Index by Body Location,” Michael L. Smith, PeerJ, 2014, 2:e338.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Justin Schmidt and Michael Smith
 

The 2014 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 18th, 2014 at the 24th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live.
PHYSICS PRIZE [JAPAN]: Kiyoshi Mabuchi, Kensei Tanaka, Daichi Uchijima and Rina Sakai, for measuring the amount of friction between a shoe and a banana skin, and between a banana skin and the floor, when a person steps on a banana skin that’s on the floor.
REFERENCE: “Frictional Coefficient under Banana Skin,” Kiyoshi Mabuchi, Kensei Tanaka, Daichi Uchijima and Rina Sakai, Tribology Online 7, no. 3, 2012, pp. 147-151.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Kiyoshi Mabuchi
 
NEUROSCIENCE PRIZE [CHINA, CANADA]: Jiangang Liu, Jun Li, Lu Feng, Ling Li, Jie Tian, and Kang Lee, for trying to understand what happens in the brains of people who see the face of Jesus in a piece of toast.
REFERENCE: “Seeing Jesus in Toast: Neural and Behavioral Correlates of Face Pareidolia,” Jiangang Liu, Jun Li, Lu Feng, Ling Li, Jie Tian, Kang Lee, Cortex, vol. 53, April 2014, Pages 60–77.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Kang Lee
 
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE [UK, FINLAND, AUSTRALIA, USA]: Peter K. Jonason, Amy Jones, and Minna Lyons, for amassing evidence that people who habitually stay up late are, on average, more self-admiring, more manipulative, and more psychopathic than people who habitually arise early in the morning.
REFERENCE: “Creatures of the Night: Chronotypes and the Dark Triad Traits,” Peter K. Jonason, Amy Jones, and Minna Lyons, Personality and Individual Differences, vol. 55, no. 5, 2013, pp. 538-541.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Peter Jonason
 
PUBLIC HEALTH PRIZE [CZECH REPUBLIC, JAPAN, USA, INDIA]: Jaroslav Flegr, Jan Havlíček and Jitka Hanušova-Lindova, and to David Hanauer, Naren Ramakrishnan, Lisa Seyfried, for investigating whether it is mentally hazardous for a human being to own a cat.
REFERENCE: ” Changes in personality profile of young women with latent toxoplasmosis,” Jaroslav Flegr and Jan Havlicek, Folia Parasitologica, vol. 46, 1999, pp. 22-28.
REFERENCE: “Decreased level of psychobiological factor novelty seeking and lower intelligence in men latently infected with the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii Dopamine, a missing link between schizophrenia and toxoplasmosis?” Jaroslav Flegr, Marek Preiss, Jiřı́ Klose, Jan Havlı́ček, Martina Vitáková, and Petr Kodym, Biological Psychology, vol. 63, 2003, pp. 253–268.
REFERENCE: “Describing the Relationship between Cat Bites and Human Depression Using Data from an Electronic Health Record,” David Hanauer, Naren Ramakrishnan, Lisa Seyfried, PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 8, 2013, e70585. WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Jaroslav Flegr, David Hanauer, Naren Ramakrishnan
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE [CZECH REPUBLIC, GERMANY, ZAMBIA]: Vlastimil Hart, Petra Nováková, Erich Pascal Malkemper, Sabine Begall, Vladimír Hanzal, Miloš Ježek, Tomáš Kušta, Veronika Němcová, Jana Adámková, Kateřina Benediktová, Jaroslav Červený and Hynek Burda, for carefully documenting that when dogs defecate and urinate, they prefer to align their body axis with Earth’s north-south geomagnetic field lines.
REFERENCE: “Dogs are sensitive to small variations of the Earth’s magnetic field,” Vlastimil Hart, Petra Nováková, Erich Pascal Malkemper, Sabine Begall, Vladimír Hanzal, Miloš Ježek, Tomáš Kušta, Veronika Němcová, Jana Adámková, Kateřina Benediktová, Jaroslav Červený and Hynek Burda, Frontiers in Zoology, 10:80, 27 December 27, 2013.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Vlastimil Hart, Petra Nováková, Pascal Malkemper, Sabine Begall, Veronika Němcová, Hynek Burda
 
ART PRIZE [ITALY]: Marina de Tommaso, Michele Sardaro, and Paolo Livrea, for measuring the relative pain people suffer while looking at an ugly painting, rather than a pretty painting, while being shot [in the hand] by a powerful laser beam.
REFERENCE: “Aesthetic value of paintings affects pain thresholds,” Marina de Tommaso, Michele Sardaro, and Paolo Livrea, Consciousness and Cognition, vol. 17, no. 4, 2008, pp. 1152-1162.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Marina de Tommaso
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE [ITALY]: ISTAT — the Italian government’s National Institute of Statistics, for proudly taking the lead in fulfilling the European Union mandate for each country to increase the official size of its national economy by including revenues from prostitution, illegal drug sales, smuggling, and all other unlawful financial transactions between willing participants.
REFERENCE: “Cambia il Sistema europeo dei conti nazionali e regionali – Sec2010“, ISTAT, 2014.
REFERENCE: “European System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010),” Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2013.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE [USA, INDIA]: Ian Humphreys, Sonal Saraiya, Walter Belenky and James Dworkin, for treating “uncontrollable” nosebleeds, using the method of nasal-packing-with-strips-of-cured-pork.
REFERENCE: “Nasal Packing With Strips of Cured Pork as Treatment for Uncontrollable Epistaxis in a Patient with Glanzmann Thrombasthenia,” Ian Humphreys, Sonal Saraiya, Walter Belenky and James Dworkin, Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology, vol. 120, no. 11, November 2011, pp. 732-36.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Sonal Saraiya
 
ARCTIC SCIENCE PRIZE [NORWAY, GERMANY, USA, CANADA]: Eigil Reimers and Sindre Eftestøl, for testing how reindeer react to seeing humans who are disguised as polar bears.
REFERENCE: “Response Behaviors of Svalbard Reindeer towards Humans and Humans Disguised as Polar Bears on Edgeøya,” Eigil Reimers and Sindre Eftestøl, Arctic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research, vol. 44, no. 4, 2012, pp. 483-9.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Eigil Reimers, Sindre Eftestøl
 
NUTRITION PRIZE [SPAIN]: Raquel Rubio, Anna Jofré, Belén Martín, Teresa Aymerich, and Margarita Garriga, for their study titled “Characterization of Lactic Acid Bacteria Isolated from Infant Faeces as Potential Probiotic Starter Cultures for Fermented Sausages.”
REFERENCE: “Characterization of Lactic Acid Bacteria Isolated from Infant Faeces as Potential Probiotic Starter Cultures for Fermented Sausages,” Raquel Rubio, Anna Jofré, Belén Martín, Teresa Aymerich, Margarita Garriga, Food Microbiology, vol. 38, 2014, pp. 303-311.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: The winners were unable to attend the ceremony; they delivered their acceptance speech via video.
 

The 2013 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 12th, 2013 at the 23rd First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE: Masateru Uchiyama [JAPAN], Xiangyuan Jin [CHINA, JAPAN], Qi Zhang [JAPAN], Toshihito Hirai [JAPAN], Atsushi Amano [JAPAN], Hisashi Bashuda [JAPAN] and Masanori Niimi [JAPAN, UK], for assessing the effect of listening to opera, on heart transplant patients who are mice.
REFERENCE: “Auditory stimulation of opera music induced prolongation of murine cardiac allograft survival and maintained generation of regulatory CD4+CD25+ cells,” Masateru Uchiyama, Xiangyuan Jin, Qi Zhang, Toshihito Hirai, Atsushi Amano, Hisashi Bashuda and Masanori Niimi, Journal of Cardiothoracic Surgery, vol. 7, no. 26, epub. March 23, 2012.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Masateru Uchiyama, Xiangyuan Jin, Masanori Niimi
 
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE: Laurent Bègue [FRANCE], Brad Bushman [USA, UK, the NETHERLANDS, POLAND], Oulmann Zerhouni [FRANCE], Baptiste Subra [FRANCE], and Medhi Ourabah [FRANCE], for confirming, by experiment, that people who think they are drunk also think they are attractive.
REFERENCE: “‘Beauty Is in the Eye of the Beer Holder’: People Who Think They Are Drunk Also Think They Are Attractive,” Laurent Bègue, Brad J. Bushman, Oulmann Zerhouni, Baptiste Subra, Medhi Ourabah, British Journal of Psychology, epub May 15, 2012.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Brad Bushman, Laurent Bègue, Medhi Ourabah
 
JOINT PRIZE IN BIOLOGY AND ASTRONOMY: Marie Dacke [SWEDEN, AUSTRALIA], Emily Baird [SWEDEN, AUSTRALIA, GERMANY], Marcus Byrne [SOUTH AFRICA, UK], Clarke Scholtz [SOUTH AFRICA], and Eric J. Warrant [SWEDEN, AUSTRALIA, GERMANY], for discovering that when dung beetles get lost, they can navigate their way home by looking at the Milky Way.
REFERENCE: “Dung Beetles Use the Milky Way for Orientation,” Marie Dacke, Emily Baird, Marcus Byrne, Clarke H. Scholtz, Eric J. Warrant, Current Biology, epub January 24, 2013.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Marie Dacke, Emily Baird, Marcus Byrne, Eric Warrant
 
SAFETY ENGINEERING PRIZE: The late Gustano Pizzo [USA], for inventing an electro-mechanical system to trap airplane hijackers — the system drops a hijacker through trap doors, seals him into a package, then drops the encapsulated hijacker through the airplane’s specially-installed bomb bay doors, whence he parachutes to earth, where police, having been alerted by radio, await his arrival. US Patent #3811643, Gustano A. Pizzo, “anti hijacking system for aircraft“, May 21, 1972.
 
PHYSICS PRIZE: Alberto Minetti [ITALY, UK, DENMARK, SWITZERLAND], Yuri Ivanenko [ITALY, RUSSIA, FRANCE], Germana Cappellini [ITALY], Nadia Dominici [ITALY, SWITZERLAND, THE NETHERLANDS], and Francesco Lacquaniti [ITALY], for discovering that some people would be physically capable of running across the surface of a pond — if those people and that pond were on the moon.
REFERENCE: “Humans Running in Place on Water at Simulated Reduced Gravity,” Alberto E. Minetti, Yuri P. Ivanenko, Germana Cappellini, Nadia Dominici, Francesco Lacquaniti, PLoS ONE, vol. 7, no. 7, 2012, e37300.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Alberto Minetti and Yuri Ivanenko
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE: Shinsuke Imai [JAPAN], Nobuaki Tsuge [JAPAN], Muneaki Tomotake [JAPAN], Yoshiaki Nagatome [JAPAN], H. Sawada [JAPAN],Toshiyuki Nagata [JAPAN, GERMANY], and Hidehiko Kumagai [JAPAN], for discovering that the biochemical process by which onions make people cry is even more complicated than scientists previously realized.
REFERENCE: “An Onion Enzyme that Makes the Eyes Water,” S. Imai, N. Tsuge, M. Tomotake, Y. Nagatome, H. Sawada, T. Nagata and H. Kumagai, Nature, vol. 419, no. 6908, October 2002, p. 685.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: All the co-authors.
 
ARCHAEOLOGY PRIZE: Brian Crandall [USA] and Peter Stahl [CANADA, USA], for parboiling a dead shrew, and then swallowing the shrew without chewing, and then carefully examining everything excreted during subsequent days — all so they could see which bones would dissolve inside the human digestive system, and which bones would not.
REFERENCE: “Human Digestive Effects on a Micromammalian Skeleton,” Peter W. Stahl and Brian D. Crandall, Journal of Archaeological Science, vol. 22, November 1995, pp. 789–97.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Brian Crandall
 
PEACE PRIZE: Alexander Lukashenko, president of Belarus, for making it illegal to applaud in public, AND to the Belarus State Police, for arresting a one-armed man for applauding.
 
PROBABILITY PRIZE: Bert Tolkamp [UK, the NETHERLANDS], Marie Haskell [UK], Fritha Langford [UK, CANADA], David Roberts [UK], and Colin Morgan [UK], for making two related discoveries: First, that the longer a cow has been lying down, the more likely that cow will soon stand up; and Second, that once a cow stands up, you cannot easily predict how soon that cow will lie down again.
REFERENCE: “Are Cows More Likely to Lie Down the Longer They Stand?” Bert J. Tolkamp, Marie J. Haskell, Fritha M. Langford, David J. Roberts, Colin A. Morgan, Applied Animal Behaviour Science, vol. 124, nos. 1-2, 2010, pp. 1–10.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Bert Tolkamp
 
PUBLIC HEALTH PRIZE: Kasian Bhanganada, Tu Chayavatana, Chumporn Pongnumkul, Anunt Tonmukayakul, Piyasakol Sakolsatayadorn, Krit Komaratal, and Henry Wilde, for the medical techniques described in their report “Surgical Management of an Epidemic of Penile Amputations in Siam” — techniques which they recommend, except in cases where the amputated penis had been partially eaten by a duck. [THAILAND]
REFERENCE: “Surgical Management of an Epidemic of Penile Amputations in Siam,” by Kasian Bhanganada, Tu Chayavatana, Chumporn Pongnumkul, Anunt Tonmukayakul, Piyasakol Sakolsatayadorn, Krit Komaratal, and Henry Wilde, American Journal of Surgery, 1983, no. 146, pp. 376-382.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Nobel laureate Eric Maskin read aloud the acceptance speech sent by the winners.
 

The 2012 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 20th, 2012 at the 22rd First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE: Anita Eerland and Rolf Zwaan [THE NETHERLANDS] and Tulio Guadalupe [PERU, RUSSIA, and THE NETHERLANDS] for their study “Leaning to the Left Makes the Eiffel Tower Seem Smaller”
REFERENCE: “Leaning to the Left Makes the Eiffel Tower Seem Smaller: Posture-Modulated Estimation,” Anita Eerland, Tulio M. Guadalupe and Rolf A. Zwaan, Psychological Science, vol. 22 no. 12, December 2011, pp. 1511-14.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Tulio Guadalupe. [NOTE: Two days after the ceremony, Anita Eerland and Rolf Zwaan married each other, in the Netherlands.]
 
PEACE PRIZE: The SKN Company [RUSSIA], for converting old Russian ammunition into new diamonds.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Igor Petrov
 
ACOUSTICS PRIZE: Kazutaka Kurihara and Koji Tsukada [JAPAN] for creating the SpeechJammer — a machine that disrupts a person’s speech, by making them hear their own spoken words at a very slight delay.
REFERENCE: “SpeechJammer: A System Utilizing Artificial Speech Disturbance with Delayed Auditory Feedback“, Kazutaka Kurihara, Koji Tsukada, arxiv.org/abs/1202.6106. February 28, 2012.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Kazutaka Kurihara and Koji Tsukada
 
NEUROSCIENCE PRIZE: Craig Bennett, Abigail Baird, Michael Miller, and George Wolford [USA], for demonstrating that brain researchers, by using complicated instruments and simple statistics, can see meaningful brain activity anywhere — even in a dead salmon.
REFERENCE: “Neural correlates of interspecies perspective taking in the post-mortem Atlantic Salmon: An argument for multiple comparisons correction,” Craig M. Bennett, Abigail A. Baird, Michael B. Miller, and George L. Wolford, poster, 15th Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping, San Francisco, CA, June 2009.
REFERENCE: “Neural Correlates of Interspecies Perspective Taking in the Post-Mortem Atlantic Salmon: An Argument For Multiple Comparisons Correction,” Craig M. Bennett, Abigail A. Baird, Michael B. Miller, and George L. Wolford, Journal of Serendipitous and Unexpected Results, vol. 1, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1-5.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Craig Bennett, Abigail Baird, Michael Miller, and George Wolford
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE: Johan Pettersson [SWEDEN and RWANDA]. for solving the puzzle of why, in certain houses in the town of Anderslöv, Sweden, people’s hair turned green.
ATTENDING THE THE CEREMONY: Johan Pettersson
 
LITERATURE PRIZE: The US Government General Accountability Office, for issuing a report about reports about reports that recommends the preparation of a report about the report about reports about reports.
REFERENCE: “Actions Needed to Evaluate the Impact of Efforts to Estimate Costs of Reports and Studies,” US Government General Accountability Office report GAO-12-480R, May 10, 2012.
 
PHYSICS PRIZE: Joseph Keller [USA], and Raymond Goldstein [USA and UK], Patrick Warren, and Robin Ball [UK], for calculating the balance of forces that shape and move the hair in a human ponytail.
REFERENCE: “Shape of a Ponytail and the Statistical Physics of Hair Fiber Bundles.” Raymond E. Goldstein, Patrick B. Warren, and Robin C. Ball, Physical Review Letters, vol. 198, no. 7, 2012.
REFERENCE: “Ponytail Motion,” Joseph B. Keller, SIAM [Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics] Journal of Applied Mathematics, vol. 70, no. 7, 2010, pp. 2667–72.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Joseph Keller, Raymond Goldstein, Patrick Warren, Robin Ball
 
FLUID DYNAMICS PRIZE: Rouslan Krechetnikov [USA, RUSSIA, CANADA] and Hans Mayer [USA] for studying the dynamics of liquid-sloshing, to learn what happens when a person walks while carrying a cup of coffee.
REFERENCE: “Walking With Coffee: Why Does It Spill?” Hans C. Mayer and Rouslan Krechetnikov, Physical Review E, vol. 85, 2012.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Rouslan Krechetnikov
 
ANATOMY PRIZE: Frans de Waal [The Netherlands and USA] and Jennifer Pokorny [USA] for discovering that chimpanzees can identify other chimpanzees individually from seeing photographs of their rear ends.
REFERENCE: “Faces and Behinds: Chimpanzee Sex Perception” Frans B.M. de Waal and Jennifer J. Pokorny, Advanced Science Letters, vol. 1, 99–103, 2008.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Frans de Waal and Jennifer Pokorny
 
MEDICINE PRIZE: Emmanuel Ben-Soussan and Michel Antonietti [FRANCE] for advising doctors who perform colonoscopies how to minimize the chance that their patients will explode.
REFERENCE: “Colonic Gas Explosion During Therapeutic Colonoscopy with Electrocautery,” Spiros D Ladas, George Karamanolis, Emmanuel Ben-Soussan, World Journal of Gastroenterology, vol. 13, no. 40, October 2007, pp. 5295–8.
REFERENCE: “Argon Plasma Coagulation in the Treatment of Hemorrhagic Radiation Proctitis is Efficient But Requires a Perfect Colonic Cleansing to Be Safe,” E. Ben-Soussan, M. Antonietti, G. Savoye, S. Herve, P. Ducrotté, and E. Lerebours, European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, vol. 16, no. 12, December 2004, pp 1315-8.
ATTENDING THE THE CEREMONY: Emmanuel Ben-Soussan
 
SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT: We are now, in 2012, correcting an error we made in the year 1999, when we failed to include one winner’s name. We now correct that, awarding a share of the 1999 physics prize to Joseph Keller. Professor Keller is also a co-winner of the 2012 Ig Nobel physics prize, making him a two-time Ig Nobel winner.
The corrected citation is:1999 PHYSICS PRIZE: Len Fisher [UK and Australia] for calculating the optimal way to dunk a biscuit, and Jean-Marc Vanden-Broeck [UK and Belgium] and Joseph Keller [USA], for calculating how to make a teapot spout that does not drip.
REFERENCE: “Physics Takes the Biscuit“, Len Fisher, Nature, vol. 397, no. 6719, February 11, 1999, p. 469.
REFERENCE: “Pouring Flows,” Jean-Marc Vanden‐Broeck and Joseph B. Keller, Physics of Fluids, vol. 29, no. 12, 1986, pp. 3958-61.
REFERENCE: “Pouring Flows With Separation,” Jean-Marc Vanden-Broeck and Joseph B. Keller, Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics, vol. 1, no. 1, 1989, pp. 156-158.
 

The 2011 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 29th, 2011 at the 21rd First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
PHYSIOLOGY PRIZE:Anna Wilkinson (of the UK), Natalie Sebanz (of THE NETHERLANDS, HUNGARY, and AUSTRIA), Isabella Mandl (of AUSTRIA) and Ludwig Huber (of AUSTRIA) for their study “No Evidence of Contagious Yawning in the Red-Footed Tortoise.”
REFERENCE: ‘No Evidence Of Contagious Yawning in the Red-Footed Tortoise Geochelone carbonaria,” Anna Wilkinson, Natalie Sebanz, Isabella Mandl, Ludwig Huber, Current Zoology, vol. 57, no. 4, 2011. pp. 477-84.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Ludwig Huber
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE: Makoto Imai, Naoki Urushihata, Hideki Tanemura, Yukinobu Tajima, Hideaki Goto, Koichiro Mizoguchi and Junichi Murakami of JAPAN, for determining the ideal density of airborne wasabi (pungent horseradish) to awaken sleeping people in case of a fire or other emergency, and for applying this knowledge to invent the wasabi alarm.
REFERENCE: “Odor generation alarm and method for informing unusual situation,” US patent 9082274B2; July 14, 2015 [application filed Feb 5, 2009]. Product info [from Seems, Inc.].
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Makoto Imai, Hideki Tanemura, Yukinobu Tajima, Hideaki Goto, Koichiro Mizoguchi and Junichi Murakami
 
MEDICINE PRIZE: Mirjam Tuk (of THE NETHERLANDS and the UK), Debra Trampe (of THE NETHERLANDS) and Luk Warlop (of BELGIUM). and jointly to Matthew Lewis, Peter Snyder and Robert Feldman (of the USA), Robert Pietrzak, David Darby, and Paul Maruff (of AUSTRALIA) for demonstrating that people make better decisions about some kinds of things — but worse decisions about other kinds of things‚ when they have a strong urge to urinate.
REFERENCE: “Inhibitory Spillover: Increased Urination Urgency Facilitates Impulse Control in Unrelated Domains,” Mirjam A. Tuk, Debra Trampe and Luk Warlop, Psychological Science, vol. 22, no. 5, May 2011, pp. 627-633.
REFERENCE: “The Effect of Acute Increase in Urge to Void on Cognitive Function in Healthy Adults,” Matthew S. Lewis, Peter J. Snyder, Robert H. Pietrzak, David Darby, Robert A. Feldman, Paul T. Maruff, Neurology and Urodynamics, vol. 30, no. 1, January 2011, pp. 183-7.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Mirjam Tuk, Luk Warlop, Peter Snyder, Robert Feldman, David Darby
 
PSYCHOLOGY PRIZE: Karl Halvor Teigen of the University of Oslo, NORWAY, for trying to understand why, in everyday life, people sigh.
REFERENCE: “Is a Sigh ‘Just a Sigh’? Sighs as Emotional Signals and Responses to a Difficult Task,” Karl Halvor Teigen, Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, vol. 49, no. 1, 2008, pp. 49–57.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Karl Halvor Teigen
 
LITERATURE PRIZE: John Perry of Stanford University, USA, for his Theory of Structured Procrastination, which says: To be a high achiever, always work on something important, using it as a way to avoid doing something that’s even more important.
REFERENCE: “How to Procrastinate and Still Get Things Done,” John Perry, Chronicle of Higher Education, February 23, 1996. Later republished elsewhere under the title “Structured Procrastination.”
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Colleague Deborah Wilkes accepted the prize on behalf of Professor Perry.
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE: Darryl Gwynne (of CANADA and AUSTRALIA and the UK and the USA) and David Rentz (of AUSTRALIA and the USA) for discovering that a certain kind of beetle mates with a certain kind of Australian beer bottle
REFERENCE: “Beetles on the Bottle: Male Buprestids Mistake Stubbies for Females (Coleoptera),” D.T. Gwynne, and D.C.F. Rentz, Journal of the Australian Entomological Society, vol. 22, , no. 1, 1983, pp. 79-80
REFERENCE: “Beetles on the Bottle,” D.T. Gwynne and D.C.F. Rentz, Antenna: Proceedings (A) of the Royal Entomological Society London, vol. 8, no. 3, 1984, pp. 116-7.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Darryl Gwynne and David Rentz
 
PHYSICS PRIZE: Philippe Perrin, Cyril Perrot, Dominique Deviterne and Bruno Ragaru (of FRANCE), and Herman Kingma (of THE NETHERLANDS), for determining why discus throwers become dizzy, and why hammer throwers don’t.
REFERENCE: “Dizziness in Discus Throwers is Related to Motion Sickness Generated While Spinning,” Philippe Perrin, Cyril Perrot, Dominique Deviterne, Bruno Ragaru and Herman Kingma, Acta Oto-laryngologica, vol. 120, no. 3, March 2000, pp. 390–5.
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: The winners accepted via recorded video.
 
MATHEMATICS PRIZE: Dorothy Martin of the USA (who predicted the world would end in 1954), Pat Robertson of the USA (who predicted the world would end in 1982), Elizabeth Clare Prophet of the USA (who predicted the world would end in 1990), Lee Jang Rim of KOREA (who predicted the world would end in 1992), Credonia Mwerinde of UGANDA (who predicted the world would end in 1999), and Harold Camping of the USA (who predicted the world would end on September 6, 1994 and later predicted that the world will end on October 21, 2011), for teaching the world to be careful when making mathematical assumptions and calculations.
 
PEACE PRIZE: Arturas Zuokas, the mayor of Vilnius, LITHUANIA, for demonstrating that the problem of illegally parked luxury cars can be solved by running them over with an armored tank.
REFERENCE: VIDEO and OFFICIAL CITY INFO
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: Arturas Zuokas
 
PUBLIC SAFETY PRIZE: John Senders of the University of Toronto, CANADA, for conducting a series of safety experiments in which a person drives an automobile on a major highway while a visor repeatedly flaps down over his face, blinding him.
REFERENCE: “The Attentional Demand of Automobile Driving,” John W. Senders, et al., Highway Research Record, vol. 195, 1967, pp. 15-33. VIDEO
ATTENDING THE CEREMONY: John Senders
 

The 2010 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 30th, 2000 at the 20th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
ENGINEERING PRIZE: Karina Acevedo-Whitehouse and Agnes Rocha-Gosselin of the Zoological Society of London, UK, and Diane Gendron of Instituto Politecnico Nacional, Baja California Sur, Mexico, for perfecting a method to collect whale snot, using a remote-control helicopter.
REFERENCE: “A Novel Non-Invasive Tool for Disease Surveillance of Free-Ranging Whales and Its Relevance to Conservation Programs,” Karina Acevedo-Whitehouse, Agnes Rocha-Gosselin and Diane Gendron, Animal Conservation, vol. 13, no. 2, April 2010, pp. 217-25.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Karina Acevedo-Whitehouse, Agnes Rocha-Gosselin, Diane Gendron
 
MEDICINE PRIZE: Simon Rietveld of the University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands, and Ilja van Beest of Tilburg University, The Netherlands, for discovering that symptoms of asthma can be treated with a roller-coaster ride.
REFERENCE: “Rollercoaster Asthma: When Positive Emotional Stress Interferes with Dyspnea Perception,” Simon Rietveld and Ilja van Beest, Behaviour Research and Therapy, vol. 45, 2006, pp. 977–87.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Simon Rietveld and Ilja van Beest
 
TRANSPORTATION PLANNING PRIZE: Toshiyuki Nakagaki, Atsushi Tero, Seiji Takagi, Tetsu Saigusa, Kentaro Ito, Kenji Yumiki, Ryo Kobayashi of Japan, and Dan Bebber, Mark Fricker of the UK, for using slime mold to determine the optimal routes for railroad tracks.
REFERENCE: “Rules for Biologically Inspired Adaptive Network Design,” Atsushi Tero, Seiji Takagi, Tetsu Saigusa, Kentaro Ito, Dan P. Bebber, Mark D. Fricker, Kenji Yumiki, Ryo Kobayashi, Toshiyuki Nakagaki, Science, Vol. 327. no. 5964, January 22, 2010, pp. 439-42. [VIDEO]
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Toshiyuki Nakagaki, Kentaro Ito, Atsushi Tero, Mark Fricker, Dan Bebber [NOTE: THE FOLLOWING ARE CO-WINNERS BOTH THIS YEAR AND IN 2008 when they were awarded an Ig Nobel Prize for demonstrating that slime molds can solve puzzles: Toshiyuki Nakagaki, Ryo Kobayashi, Atsushi Tero]
 
PHYSICS PRIZE: Lianne Parkin, Sheila Williams, and Patricia Priest of the University of Otago, New Zealand, for demonstrating that, on icy footpaths in wintertime, people slip and fall less often if they wear socks on the outside of their shoes.
REFERENCE: “Preventing Winter Falls: A Randomised Controlled Trial of a Novel Intervention,” Lianne Parkin, Sheila Williams, and Patricia Priest, New Zealand Medical Journal. vol. 122, no, 1298, July 3, 2009, pp. 31-8.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Lianne Parkin
 
PEACE PRIZE: Richard Stephens, John Atkins, and Andrew Kingston of Keele University, UK, for confirming the widely held belief that swearing relieves pain.
REFERENCE: “Swearing as a Response to Pain,” Richard Stephens, John Atkins, and Andrew Kingston, Neuroreport, vol. 20 , no. 12, 2009, pp. 1056-60.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Richard Stephens
 
PUBLIC HEALTH PRIZE: Manuel Barbeito, Charles Mathews, and Larry Taylor of the Industrial Health and Safety Office, Fort Detrick, Maryland, USA, for determining by experiment that microbes cling to bearded scientists.
REFERENCE: “Microbiological Laboratory Hazard of Bearded Men,” Manuel S. Barbeito, Charles T. Mathews, and Larry A. Taylor, Applied Microbiology, vol. 15, no. 4, July 1967, pp. 899–906.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Manuel S. Barbeito was unable to travel, due to health reasons. A representative read his acceptance speech for him.
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE: The executives and directors of Goldman Sachs, AIG, Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns, Merrill Lynch, and Magnetar for creating and promoting new ways to invest money — ways that maximize financial gain and minimize financial risk for the world economy, or for a portion thereof.
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE: Eric Adams of MIT, Scott Socolofsky of Texas A&M University, Stephen Masutani of the University of Hawaii, and BP [British Petroleum], for disproving the old belief that oil and water don’t mix.
REFERENCE: “Review of Deep Oil Spill Modeling Activity Supported by the Deep Spill JIP and Offshore Operator’s Committee. Final Report,” Eric Adams and Scott Socolofsky, 2005.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Eric Adams, Scott Socolofsky, and Stephen Masutani
 
MANAGEMENT PRIZE: Alessandro Pluchino, Andrea Rapisarda, and Cesare Garofalo of the University of Catania, Italy, for demonstrating mathematically that organizations would become more efficient if they promoted people at random.
REFERENCE: “The Peter Principle Revisited: A Computational Study,” Alessandro Pluchino, Andrea Rapisarda, and Cesare Garofalo, Physica A, vol. 389, no. 3, February 2010, pp. 467-72.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Alessandro Pluchino, Andrea Rapisarda, and Cesare Garofalo.
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE: Libiao Zhang, Min Tan, Guangjian Zhu, Jianping Ye, Tiyu Hong, Shanyi Zhou, and Shuyi Zhang of China, and Gareth Jones of the University of Bristol, UK, for scientifically documenting fellatio in fruit bats.
REFERENCE: “Fellatio by Fruit Bats Prolongs Copulation Time,” Min Tan, Gareth Jones, Guangjian Zhu, Jianping Ye, Tiyu Hong, Shanyi Zhou, Shuyi Zhang and Libiao Zhang, PLoS ONE, vol. 4, no. 10, e7595.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Gareth Jones
 

The 2009 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 1st, 2009 at the 19th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
VETERINARY MEDICINE PRIZE: Catherine Douglas and Peter Rowlinson of Newcastle University, Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, UK, for showing that cows who have names give more milk than cows that are nameless.
REFERENCE: “Exploring Stock Managers’ Perceptions of the Human-Animal Relationship on Dairy Farms and an Association with Milk Production,” Catherine Bertenshaw [Douglas] and Peter Rowlinson, Anthrozoos, vol. 22, no. 1, March 2009, pp. 59-69. DOI: 10.2752/175303708X390473.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Peter Rowlinson. Catherine Douglas was unable to travel because she recently gave birth; she sent a photo of herself, her new daughter dressed in a cow suit, and a cow.
 
PEACE PRIZE: Stephan Bolliger, Steffen Ross, Lars Oesterhelweg, Michael Thali and Beat Kneubuehl of the University of Bern, Switzerland, for determining — by experiment — whether it is better to be smashed over the head with a full bottle of beer or with an empty bottle.
REFERENCE: “Are Full or Empty Beer Bottles Sturdier and Does Their Fracture-Threshold Suffice to Break the Human Skull?” Stephan A. Bolliger, Steffen Ross, Lars Oesterhelweg, Michael J. Thali and Beat P. Kneubuehl, Journal of Forensic and Legal Medicine, vol. 16, no. 3, April 2009, pp. 138-42. DOI:10.1016/j.jflm.2008.07.013.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Stephan Bolliger
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE: The directors, executives, and auditors of four Icelandic banks — Kaupthing Bank, Landsbanki, Glitnir Bank, and Central Bank of Iceland — for demonstrating that tiny banks can be rapidly transformed into huge banks, and vice versa — and for demonstrating that similar things can be done to an entire national economy.
REFERENCE: Report of the Special Investigation Commission, issued April 12, 2010.
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE: Javier Morales, Miguel Apátiga, and Victor M. Castaño of Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, for creating diamonds from liquid — specifically from tequila.
REFERENCE: “Growth of Diamond Films from Tequila,” Javier Morales, Miguel Apatiga and Victor M. Castano, 2008, arXiv:0806.1485. Also published as Reviews on Advanced Materials Science, vol. 22, no. 1, 2009, pp. 134-8.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Javier Morales and Miguel Apátiga
 
MEDICINE PRIZE: Donald L. Unger, of Thousand Oaks, California, USA, for investigating a possible cause of arthritis of the fingers, by diligently cracking the knuckles of his left hand — but never cracking the knuckles of his right hand — every day for more than sixty (60) years.
REFERENCE: “Does Knuckle Cracking Lead to Arthritis of the Fingers?“, Donald L. Unger, Arthritis and Rheumatism, vol. 41, no. 5, 1998, pp. 949-50.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Donald Unger
 
PHYSICS PRIZE: Katherine K. Whitcome of the University of Cincinnati, USA, Daniel E. Lieberman of Harvard University, USA, and Liza J. Shapiro of the University of Texas, USA, for analytically determining why pregnant women don’t tip over.
REFERENCE: “Fetal Load and the Evolution of Lumbar Lordosis in Bipedal Hominins,” Katherine K. Whitcome, Liza J. Shapiro & Daniel E. Lieberman, Nature, vol. 450, 1075-1078 (December 13, 2007). DOI:10.1038/nature06342.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Katherine Whitcome and Daniel Lieberman
 
LITERATURE PRIZE: Ireland’s police service (An Garda Siochana), for writing and presenting more than fifty traffic tickets to the most frequent driving offender in the country — Prawo Jazdy — whose name in Polish means “Driving License”.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: [Karolina Lewestam, a Polish citizen and holder of a Polish driver’s license, speaking on behalf of all her fellow Polish licensed drivers, expressed her good wishes to the Irish police service.]
 
PUBLIC HEALTH PRIZE: Elena N. Bodnar, Raphael C. Lee, and Sandra Marijan of Chicago, Illinois, USA, for inventing a brassiere that, in an emergency, can be quickly converted into a pair of protective face masks, one for the brassiere wearer and one to be given to some needy bystander.
REFERENCE: U.S. patent # 7255627, granted August 14, 2007 for a “Garment Device Convertible to One or More Facemasks.”
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Elena Bodnar.
 
MATHEMATICS PRIZE: Gideon Gono, governor of Zimbabwe’s Reserve Bank, for giving people a simple, everyday way to cope with a wide range of numbers — from very small to very big — by having his bank print bank notes with denominations ranging from one cent ($.01) to one hundred trillion dollars ($100,000,000,000,000).
REFERENCE: Zimbabwe’s Casino Economy — Extraordinary Measures for Extraordinary Challenges, Gideon Gono, ZPH Publishers, Harare, 2008, ISBN 978-079-743-679-4.
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE: Fumiaki Taguchi, Song Guofu, and Zhang Guanglei of Kitasato University Graduate School of Medical Sciences in Sagamihara, Japan, for demonstrating that kitchen refuse can be reduced more than 90% in mass by using bacteria extracted from the feces of giant pandas.
REFERENCE: “Microbial Treatment of Kitchen Refuse With Enzyme-Producing Thermophilic Bacteria From Giant Panda Feces,” Fumiaki Taguchia, Song Guofua, and Zhang Guanglei, Seibutsu-kogaku Kaishi, vol. 79, no 12, 2001, pp. 463-9. [and abstracted in Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, vol. 92, no. 6, 2001, p. 602.]
REFERENCE: “Microbial Treatment of Food-Production Waste with Thermopile Enzyme-Producing Bacterial Flora from a Giant Panda” [in Japanese], Fumiaki Taguchi, Song Guofu, Yasunori Sugai, Hiroyasu Kudo and Akira Koikeda, Journal of the Japan Society of Waste Management Experts, vol. 14, no. 2, 2003, pp. , 76-82.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Fumiaki Taguchi
 

The 2008 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 2nd, 2008 at the 18th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
NUTRITION PRIZE. Massimiliano Zampini of the University of Trento, Italy and Charles Spence of Oxford University, UK, for electronically modifying the sound of a potato chip to make the person chewing the chip believe it to be crisper and fresher than it really is.
REFERENCE: “The Role of Auditory Cues in Modulating the Perceived Crispness and Staleness ofPotato Chips,” Massimiliano Zampini and Charles Spence,Journal of Sensory Studies, vol. 19, October 2004,  pp. 347-63.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Massimiliano Zampini. unable to attend the ceremony, was presented with the prize at a special ceremony, later in the month, at the Genoa Science Festival.
 
PEACE PRIZE. The Swiss Federal Ethics Committee on Non-Human Biotechnology (ECNH) and the citizens of Switzerland for adopting the legal principle that plants have dignity.
REFERENCE: “The Dignity of Living Beings With Regard to Plants. Moral Consideration of Plants for Their Own Sake”
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Urs Thurnherr, member of the committee.
 
ARCHAEOLOGY PRIZE. Astolfo G. Mello Araujo and José Carlos Marcelino of Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil, for measuring how the course of history, or at least the contents of an archaeological dig site, can be scrambled by the actions of a live armadillo.
REFERENCE: “The Role of Armadillos in the Movement of Archaeological Materials: An Experimental Approach,” Astolfo G. Mello Araujo and José Carlos Marcelino, Geoarchaeology, vol. 18, no. 4, April 2003, pp. 433-60.
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE. Marie-Christine Cadiergues, Christel Joubert, and  Michel Franc of Ecole Nationale Veterinaire de Toulouse, France for discovering that the fleas that live on a dog can jump higher than the fleas that live on a cat.
REFERENCE: “A Comparison of Jump Performances of the Dog Flea, Ctenocephalides canis (Curtis, 1826) and the Cat Flea, Ctenocephalides felis felis (Bouche, 1835),” M.C. Cadiergues, C. Joubert, and M. Franc, Veterinary Parasitology, vol. 92, no. 3, October 1, 2000, pp. 239-41.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Marie-Christine Cadiergues and Christel Joubert, unable to attend the ceremony, were presented with the prize at a special ceremony, later in the month, at the Genoa Science Festival.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE. Dan Ariely of Duke University (USA), Rebecca L. Waber of MIT (USA), Baba Shiv of Stanford University (USA), and Ziv Carmon of INSEAD (Singapore) for demonstrating that high-priced fake medicine is more effective than low-priced fake medicine.
REFERENCE: “Commercial Features of Placebo and Therapeutic Efficacy,” Rebecca L. Waber; Baba Shiv; Ziv Carmon; Dan Ariely, Journal of the American Medical Association, March 5, 2008; 299: 1016-1017.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Dan Ariely
 
COGNITIVE SCIENCE PRIZE. Toshiyuki Nakagaki of Hokkaido University, Japan, Hiroyasu Yamada of Nagoya, Japan, Ryo Kobayashi of Hiroshima University, Atsushi Tero of Presto JST, Akio Ishiguro of Tohoku University, and Ágotá Tóth of the University of Szeged, Hungary, for discovering that slime molds can solve puzzles.
REFERENCE: “Intelligence: Maze-Solving by an Amoeboid Organism,” Toshiyuki Nakagaki, Hiroyasu Yamada, and Ágota Tóth, Nature, vol. 407, September 2000, p. 470. [VIDEO]
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Toshiyuki Nakagaki, Ryo Kobayashi, Atsushi Tero
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE. Geoffrey Miller, Joshua Tybur and Brent Jordan of the University of New Mexico, USA, for discovering that professional lap dancers earn higher tips when they are ovulating.
REFERENCE: “Ovulatory Cycle Effects on Tip Earnings by Lap Dancers: Economic Evidence for Human Estrus?” Geoffrey Miller, Joshua M. Tybur, Brent D. Jordan, Evolution and Human Behavior, vol. 28, 2007, pp. 375-81.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Geoffrey Miller and Brent Jordan
 
PHYSICS PRIZE. Dorian Raymer of the Ocean Observatories Initiative at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, USA, and Douglas Smith of the University of California, San Diego, USA, for proving mathematically that heaps of string or hair or almost anything else will inevitably tangle themselves up in knots.
REFERENCE: “Spontaneous Knotting of an Agitated String,” Dorian M. Raymer and Douglas E. Smith, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 104, no. 42, October 16, 2007, pp. 16432-7.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Dorian Raymer
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE. Sharee A. Umpierre of the University of Puerto Rico, Joseph A. Hill of The Fertility Centers of New England (USA), Deborah J. Anderson of Boston University School of Medicine and Harvard Medical School (USA), for discovering that Coca-Cola is an effective spermicide, and to Chuang-Ye Hong of Taipei Medical University (Taiwan), C.C. Shieh, P. Wu, and B.N. Chiang (all of Taiwan) for discovering that it is not.
REFERENCE: “Effect of ‘Coke’ on Sperm Motility,” Sharee A. Umpierre, Joseph A. Hill, and Deborah J. Anderson, New England Journal of Medicine, 1985, vol. 313, no. 21, p. 1351.
REFERENCE: “The Spermicidal Potency of Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola,” C.Y. Hong, C.C. Shieh, P. Wu, and B.N. Chiang, Human Toxicology, vol. 6, no. 5, September 1987, pp. 395-6. [NOTE: THE JOURNAL LATER CHANGED ITS NAME. NOW CALLED “Human & experimental toxicology”]
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Deborah Anderson, and C.Y. Hong’s daughter Wan Hong
 
LITERATURE PRIZE. David Sims of Cass Business School. London, UK, for his lovingly written study “You Bastard: A Narrative Exploration of the Experience of Indignation within Organizations.”
REFERENCE: “You Bastard: A Narrative Exploration of the Experience of Indignation within Organizations,” David Sims, Organization Studies, vol. 26, no. 11, 2005, pp. 1625-40.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: David Sims
 

The 2007 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 4th, 2007 at the 17th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
MEDICINE PRIZE [UK, USA] — Brian Witcombe and Dan Meyer, for their penetrating medical report “Sword Swallowing and Its Side Effects.”
REFERENCE: “Sword Swallowing and Its Side Effects,” Brian Witcombeand Dan Meyer, British Medical Journal, December 23, 2006, vol. 333, pp. 1285-7.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Brian Witcombe and Dan Meyer
 
PHYSICS PRIZE [USA, INDIA, CHILE] — L. Mahadevan, and Enrique Cerda Villablanca, for studying how sheets become wrinkled.
REFERENCE: “Wrinkling of an Elastic Sheet Under Tension,” E. Cerda, K. Ravi-Chandar, L. Mahadevan, Nature, vol. 419, October 10, 2002, pp. 579-80.
REFERENCE: “Geometry and Physics of Wrinkling,” E. Cerda and L. Mahadevan, Physical Review Letters, fol. 90, no. 7, February 21, 2003, pp. 074302/1-4.
REFERENCE: “Elements of Draping,” E. Cerda, L. Mahadevan and J. Passini, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 101, no. 7, 2004, pp. 1806-10.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Lakshminarayanan Mahadevan, and Enrique Cerda Villablanca’s sister Mariela.
 
BIOLOGY PRIZE [THE NETHERLANDS] —  Prof. Dr. Johanna E.M.H. van Bronswijk, for doing a census of all the mites, insects, spiders, pseudoscorpions, crustaceans, bacteria, algae, ferns and fungi with whom we share our beds each night.
REFERENCE: “Huis, Bed en Beestjes” [House, Bed and Bugs], J.E.M.H. van Bronswijk, Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Geneeskunde, vol. 116, no. 20, May 13, 1972, pp. 825-31.
REFERENCE: “Het Stof, de Mijten en het Bed” [Dust, Mites and Bedding]. J.E.M.H. van Bronswijk Vakblad voor Biologen, vol. 53, no. 2, 1973, pp. 22-5.
REFERENCE: “Autotrophic Organisms in Mattress Dust in the Netherlands,” B. van de Lustgraaf, J.H.H.M. Klerkx, J.E.M.H. van Bronswijk, Acta Botanica Neerlandica, vol. 27, no. 2,  1978, pp 125-8.
REFERENCE: “A Bed Ecosystem,” J.E.M.H. van Bronswijk, Lecture Abstracts — 1st Benelux Congress of Zoology, Leuven, November 4-5, 1994, p. 36.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Dr. Johanna E.M.H. van Bronswijk
 
CHEMISTRY PRIZE [JAPAN] — Mayu Yamamoto, for developing a way to extract vanillin — vanilla fragrance and flavoring — from cow dung.
REFERENCE: “Novel Production Method for Plant Polyphenol from Livestock Excrement Using Subcritical Water Reaction,” Mayu Yamamoto, International Journal of Chemical Engineering, 2008.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Mayu Yamamoto
PRESS NOTE: Toscanini’s Ice Cream, the finest ice cream shop in Cambridge, Massachusetts, created a new ice cream flavor in honor of Mayu Yamamoto, and introduced it at the Ig Nobel ceremony. The flavor is called “Yum-a-Moto Vanilla Twist.”
 
LINGUISTICS PRIZE [SPAIN] — Juan Manuel Toro, Josep B. Trobalon and Núria Sebastián-Gallés, for showing that rats sometimes cannot tell the difference between a person speaking Japanese backwards and a person speaking Dutch backwards.
REFERENCE: “Effects of Backward Speech and Speaker Variability in Language Discrimination by Rats,” Juan M. Toro, Josep B. Trobalon and Núria Sebastián-Gallés, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, vol. 31, no. 1, January 2005, pp 95-100.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: The winners could not travel to the ceremony, so they instead delivered their acceptance speech via recorded video
 
LITERATURE PRIZE [AUSTRALIA] — Glenda Browne, for her study of the word “the” — and of the many ways it causes problems for anyone who tries to put things into alphabetical order.
REFERENCE: “The Definite Article: Acknowledging ‘The’ in Index Entries,” Glenda Browne, The Indexer, vol. 22, no. 3 April 2001, pp. 119-22.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Glenda Browne
 
PEACE PRIZE [USA] — The Air Force Wright Laboratory, Dayton, Ohio, USA, for instigating research & development on a chemical weapon — the so-called “gay bomb” — that will make enemy soldiers become sexually irresistible to each other.
REFERENCE: “Harassing, Annoying, and ‘Bad Guy’ Identifying Chemicals,” Wright Laboratory, WL/FIVR, Wright Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, June 1, 1994.
 
NUTRITION PRIZE [USA] —  Brian Wansink, for exploring the seemingly boundless appetites of human beings, by feeding them with a self-refilling, bottomless bowl of soup.
REFERENCE: “Bottomless Bowls: Why Visual Cues of Portion Size May Influence Intake,” Brian Wansink, James E. Painter and Jill North, Obesity Research, vol. 13, no. 1, January 2005, pp. 93-100.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Brian Wansink.
 
ECONOMICS PRIZE [TAIWAN] — Kuo Cheng Hsieh, for patenting a device, in the year 2001, that catches bank robbers by dropping a net over them.
REFERENCE: U.S. patent #6,219,959, granted on April 24, 2001, for a “net trapping system for capturing a robber immediately.”
NOTE: The Ig Nobel Board of Governors attempted repeatedly to find Mr. Hsieh, but he seemed to have vanished mysteriously. Some days after the ceremony came news that he is alive and well.
 
AVIATION PRIZE [ARGENTINA] — Patricia V. Agostino, Santiago A. Plano and Diego A. Golombek, for their discovery that Viagra aids jetlag recovery in hamsters.
REFERENCE: “Sildenafil Accelerates Reentrainment of Circadian Rhythms After Advancing Light Schedules,” Patricia V. Agostino, Santiago A. Plano and Diego A. Golombek, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 104, no. 23, June 5 2007, pp. 9834-9.
WHO ATTENDED THE CEREMONY: Diego A. Golombek

The 2006 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 5th, 2006 at the 16th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
ORNITHOLOGY: Ivan R. Schwab, of the University of California Davis, and the late Philip R.A. May of the University of California Los Angeles, for exploring and explaining why woodpeckers don’t get headaches.
REFERENCE: “Cure for a Headache,” Ivan R Schwab, British Journal of Ophthalmology, vol. 86, 2002, p. 843.
REFERENCE: “Woodpeckers and Head Injury,” Philip R.A. May, JoaquinM. Fuster, Paul Newman and Ada Hirschman, Lancet, vol. 307, no. 7957, February28, 1976, pp. 454-5.
REFERENCE: “Woodpeckers and Head Injury,” Philip R.A. May, JoaquinM. Fuster, Paul Newman and Ada Hirschman, Lancet, vol. 307, no. 7973, June 19,1976, pp. 1347-8.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Ivan Schwab
 
NUTRITION: Wasmia Al-Houty of Kuwait University and Faten Al-Mussalam of the Kuwait Environment Public Authority, for showing that dung beetles are finicky eaters.
REFERENCE: “Dung Preference of the Dung Beetle Scarabaeus cristatus Fab (Coleoptera-Scarabaeidae) from Kuwait,” Wasmia Al-Houty and Faten Al-Musalam, Journal of Arid Environments, vol. 35, no. 3, 1997, pp. 511-6.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Faten Al-Musalam
 
PEACE: Howard Stapleton of Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, for inventing an electromechanical teenager repellant — a device that makes annoying high-pitched noise designed to be audible to teenagers but not to adults; and for later using that same technology to make telephone ringtones that are audible to teenagers but probably not to their teachers.
REFERENCE: http://www.compoundsecurity.co.uk
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Howard Stapleton planned to attend, but his plans were interrupted by a family medical situation.
 
ACOUSTICS: D. Lynn Halpern (of Harvard Vanguard Medical Associates, and Brandeis University, and Northwestern University), Randolph Blake (of Vanderbilt University and Northwestern University) and James Hillenbrand (of Western Michigan University and Northwestern University) for conducting experiments to learn why people dislike the sound of fingernails scraping on a blackboard.
REFERENCE: “Psychoacoustics of a Chilling Sound,” D. Lynn Halpern, Randolph Blake and James Hillenbrand,  Perception and Psychophysics, vol. 39,1986, pp. 77-80.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Lynn Halpern and Randolph Blake
 
MATHEMATICS: Nic Svenson and Piers Barnes of the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Research Organization, for calculating the number of photographs you must take to (almost) ensure that nobody in a group photo will have their eyes closed
REFERENCE: “Blink-Free Photos, Guaranteed,” Velocity, June 2006,
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Nic Svenson and Piers Barnes
 
LITERATURE: Daniel Oppenheimer of Princeton University for his report “Consequences of Erudite Vernacular Utilized Irrespective of Necessity: Problems with Using Long Words Needlessly.”
REFERENCE: “Consequences of Erudite Vernacular Utilized Irrespective of Necessity: Problems with Using Long Words Needlessly,” Daniel M. Oppenheimer, Applied Cognitive Psychology, vol. 20, no. 2, March 2006, pp. 139-56.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Daniel Oppenheimer
 
MEDICINE: Francis M. Fesmire of the University of Tennessee College of Medicine, for his medical case report “Termination of Intractable Hiccups with Digital Rectal Massage“; and Majed Odeh, Harry Bassan, and Arie Oliven of Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, for their subsequent medical case report also titled “Termination of Intractable Hiccups with Digital Rectal Massage.”
REFERENCE: “Termination of Intractable Hiccups with Digital Rectal Massage,” Francis M. Fesmire,  Annals of Emergency Medicine, vol. 17, no. 8, August 1988 p. 872.
REFERENCE: “Termination of Intractable Hiccups with Digital Rectal Massage,”
Majed Odeh, Harry Bassan, and Arie Oliven, Journal of Internal Medicine, vol. 227, no. 2, February 1990, pp. 145-6. They are at the Department of Internal Medicine, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
REFERENCE: “Hiccups and Digital Rectal Massage,”  M. Odeh and A. Oliven, Archives of Otolaryngology — Head and Neck Surgery, vol. 119, 1993, p. 1383.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Francis Fesmire
 
PHYSICS: Basile Audoly and Sebastien Neukirch of the Université Pierre et Marie Curie, in Paris, for their insights into why, when you bend dry spaghetti, it often breaks into more than two pieces.
REFERENCE: “Fragmentation of Rods by Cascading Cracks: Why Spaghetti Does Not Break in Half,” Basile Audoly and Sebastien Neukirch, Physical Review Letters, vol. 95, no. 9, August 26, 2005, pp. 95505-1 to 95505-1.
REFERENCE: Video and other details at <http://www.lmm.jussieu.fr/spaghetti/index.html>
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Basile Audoly and Sebastien Neukirch
 
CHEMISTRY: Antonio Mulet, José Javier Benedito and José Bon of the University of Valencia, Spain, and Carmen Rosselló of the University of Illes Balears, in Palma de Mallorca, Spain,  for their study “Ultrasonic Velocity in Cheddar Cheese as Affected by Temperature.”
REFERENCE: “Ultrasonic Velocity in Cheddar Cheese as Affected by Temperature,” Antonio Mulet, José Javier Benedito, José Bon, and Carmen Rosselló, Journal of Food Science, vol. 64, no. 6, 1999, pp. 1038-41.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: The winners delivered their acceptance speech via video recording.
 
BIOLOGY: Bart Knols (of Wageningen Agricultural University, in Wageningen, the Netherlands; and of the National Institute for Medical Research, in Ifakara Centre, Tanzania, and of the International Atomic Energy Agency, in Vienna Austria) and Ruurd de Jong (of Wageningen Agricultural University and of Santa Maria degli Angeli, Italy) for showing that the female malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae is attracted equally to the smell of limburger cheese and to the smell of human feet.
REFERENCE: “On Human Odour, Malaria Mosquitoes, and Limburger Cheese,” Bart. G.J. Knols, The Lancet, vol. 348 , November 9, 1996, p. 1322.
REFERENCE: “Behavioural and electrophysiological responses of the female malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae (Diptera: Culicidae) to Limburger cheese volatiles,” Bulletin of Entomological Research, B.G.J. Knols, J.J.A. van Loon, A. Cork, R.D. Robinson, et al., vol. 87, 1997, pp. 151-159.
REFERENCE: “Limburger Cheese as an Attractant for the Malaria Mosquito Anopheles gambiae s.s.,” B.G,J. Knols and R. De Jong, Parasitology Today, yd. 12, no. 4, 1996, pp. 159-61.
REFERENCE: “Selection of Biting Sites on Man by Two Malaria Mosquito Species,” R. De Jong and B.G.J. Knols, Experientia, vol. 51, 1995, pp. 80–84.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL PRIZE CEREMONY: Bart Knols
 

The 2005 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 6th, 2005 at the 15th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
AGRICULTURAL HISTORY: James Watson of Massey University, New Zealand, for his scholarly study, “The Significance of Mr. Richard Buckley’s Exploding Trousers. ”
REFERENCE: “The Significance of Mr. Richard Buckley’s Exploding Trousers: Reflections on an Aspect of Technological Change in New Zealand Dairy-Farming between the World Wars,” James Watson, Agricultural History, vol. 78, no. 3, Summer 2004, pp. 346-60.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: James Watson
 
PHYSICS: John Mainstone and the late Thomas Parnell of the University of Queensland, Australia, for patiently conducting an experiment that began in the year 1927 — in which a glob of congealed black tar has been slowly, slowly dripping through a funnel, at a rate of approximately one drop every nine years.
REFERENCE: “The Pitch Drop Experiment,” R. Edgeworth, B.J. Dalton and T. Parnell, European Journal of Physics, 1984, pp. 198-200.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: John Mainstone
 
MEDICINE: Gregg A. Miller of Oak Grove, Missouri, for inventing Neuticles — artificial replacement testicles for dogs, which are available in three sizes, and three degrees of firmness.
REFERENCES: US Patent #5868140, and the book Going Going NUTS!, by Gregg A. Miller, PublishAmerica, 2004, ISBN 1413753167.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: The winner was unable to travel, and delivered his acceptance speech via video.
 
LITERATURE: The Internet entrepreneurs of Nigeria, for creating and then using e-mail to distribute a bold series of short stories, thus introducing millions of readers to a cast of rich characters — General Sani Abacha, Mrs. Mariam Sanni Abacha, Barrister Jon A Mbeki Esq., and others — each of whom requires just a small amount of expense money so as to obtain access to the great wealth to which they are entitled and which they would like to share with the kind person who assists them.
 
PEACE: Claire Rind and Peter Simmons of Newcastle University, in the U.K., for electrically monitoring the activity of a brain cell in a locust while that locust was watching selected highlights from the movie “Star Wars.”
REFERENCE: “Orthopteran DCMD Neuron: A Reevaluation of Responses to Moving Objects. I. Selective Responses to Approaching Objects,” F.C. Rind and P.J. Simmons, Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 68, no. 5, November 1992, pp. 1654-66.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Claire Rind
 
ECONOMICS: Gauri Nanda of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, for inventing an alarm clock that runs away and hides, repeatedly, thus ensuring that people DO get out of bed, and thus theoretically adding many productive hours to the workday.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Gauri Nanda
 
CHEMISTRY: Edward Cussler of the University of Minnesota and Brian Gettelfinger of the University of Minnesota and the University of Wisconsin, for conducting a careful experiment to settle the longstanding scientific question: can people swim faster in syrup or in water?
REFERENCE: “Will Humans Swim Faster or Slower in Syrup?” American Institute of Chemical Engineers Journal, Brian Gettelfinger and E. L. Cussler, vol. 50, no. 11, October 2004, pp. 2646-7.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Brian Gettelfinger and Edward Cussler
 
BIOLOGY: Benjamin Smith of the University of Adelaide, Australia and the University of Toronto, Canada and the Firmenich perfume company, Geneva, Switzerland, and ChemComm Enterprises, Archamps, France; Craig Williams of James Cook University and the University of South Australia; Michael Tyler of the University of Adelaide; Brian Williams of the University of Adelaide; and Yoji Hayasaka of the Australian Wine Research Institute; for painstakingly smelling and cataloging the peculiar odors produced by 131 different species of frogs when the frogs were feeling stressed.
REFERENCE: “A Survey of Frog Odorous Secretions, Their Possible Functions and Phylogenetic Significance,” Benjamin P.C. Smith, Craig R. Williams, Michael J. Tyler, and Brian D. Williams, Applied Herpetology, vol. 2, no. 1-2, February 1, 2004, pp. 47-82.
REFERENCE: “Chemical and Olfactory Characterization of Odorous Compounds and Their Precursors in the Parotoid Gland Secretion of the Green Tree Frog, Litoria caerulea,” Benjamin P.C. Smith, Michael J. Tyler, Brian D. Williams, and Yoji Hayasaka, Journal of Chemical Ecology, vol. 29, no. 9, September 2003.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Ben Smith and Craig Williams
 
NUTRITION: Dr. Yoshiro Nakamats of Tokyo, Japan, for photographing and retrospectively analyzing every meal he has consumed during a period of 34 years (and counting).[See the movie “The Invention of Dr. Nakamats“, 2009]
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Dr. Yoshiro Nakamats
 
FLUID DYNAMICS: Victor Benno Meyer-Rochow of International University Bremen, Germany and the University of Oulu, Finland; and Jozsef Gal of Loránd Eötvös University, Hungary, for using basic principles of physics to calculate the pressure that builds up inside a penguin, as detailed in their report “Pressures Produced When Penguins Pooh — Calculations on Avian Defaecation.”
PUBLISHED IN: Polar Biology, vol. 27, 2003, pp. 56-8.
ACCEPTING: The winners were unable to attend the ceremony because they could not obtain United States visas to visit the United States. Dr. Meyer-Rochow sent an acceptance speech via video.
 

The 2004 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 30th, 2004 at the 14th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
MEDICINE: Steven Stack of Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA and James Gundlach of Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama, USA, for their published report “The Effect of Country Music on Suicide.”
PUBLISHED IN: Social Forces, vol. 71, no. 1, September 1992, pp. 211-8.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: James Gundlach.
 
PHYSICS: Ramesh Balasubramaniam of the University of Ottawa, and Michael Turvey of the University of Connecticut and Haskins Laboratory, for exploring and explaining the dynamics of hula-hooping.
REFERENCE: “Coordination Modes in the Multisegmental Dynamics of Hula Hooping,” Ramesh Balasubramaniam and Michael T. Turvey, Biological Cybernetics, vol. 90, no. 3, March 2004, pp. 176-90.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Ramesh Balasubramaniam and Michael Turvey.
 
PUBLIC HEALTH: Jillian Clarke of the Chicago High School for Agricultural Sciences, and then Howard University, for investigating the scientific validity of the Five-Second Rule about whether it’s safe to eat food that’s been dropped on the floor.
REFERENCE: “If You Drop It, Should You Eat It? Scientists Weigh In on the 5-Second Rule,” ACES College News, September 2, 2003.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Jillian Clarke
 
CHEMISTRY: The Coca-Cola Company of Great Britain, for using advanced technology to convert ordinary tap water into Dasani, a transparent form of water, which for precautionary reasons has been made unavailable to consumers.
 
ENGINEERING: Donald J. Smith and his father, the late Frank J. Smith, of Orlando Florida, USA, for patenting the combover (U.S. Patent #4,022,227).
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Donald Smith’s son, Scott Jackson Smith, and daughter, Heather Smith.
 
LITERATURE: The American Nudist Research Library of Kissimmee, Florida, USA, for preserving nudist history so that everyone can see it.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Pamela Chestek, the daughter of ANRL director Helen Fisher.
 
PSYCHOLOGY: Daniel Simons of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Christopher Chabris of Harvard University, for demonstrating that when people pay close attention to something, it’s all too easy to overlook anything else — even a woman in a gorilla suit.
REFERENCE: “Gorillas in Our Midst,” Daniel J. Simons and Christopher F. Chabris, vol. 28, Perception, 1999, pages 1059-74.
DEMO: <http://viscog.beckman.uiuc.edu/media/ig.html>
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Daniel Simons and Christopher Chabris.
 
ECONOMICS: The Vatican, for outsourcing prayers to India.
 
PEACE: Daisuke Inoue of Hyogo, Japan, for inventing karaoke, thereby providing an entirely new way for people to learn to tolerate each other.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Daisuke Inoue.
 
BIOLOGY: Ben Wilson of the University of British Columbia, Lawrence Dill of Simon Fraser University [Canada], Robert Batty of the Scottish Association for Marine Science, Magnus Whalberg of the University of Aarhus [Denmark], and Hakan Westerberg of Sweden’s National Board of Fisheries, for showing that herrings apparently communicate by farting.
REFERENCE: “Sounds Produced by Herring (Clupea harengus) Bubble Release,” Magnus Wahlberg and Håkan Westerberg, Aquatic Living Resources, vol. 16, 2003, pp. 271-5.
REFERENCE: “Pacific and Atlantic Herring Produce Burst Pulse Sounds,” Ben Wilson, Robert S. Batty and Lawrence M. Dill, Biology Letters, vol. 271, 2003, pp. S95-S97.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Lawrence Dill, Robert Batty, Magnus Whalberg, Hakan Westerberg.

The 2003 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September NNth, 2003 at the 13th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
ENGINEERING: The late John Paul Stapp, the late Edward A. Murphy, Jr., and George Nichols, for jointly giving birth in 1949 to Murphy’s Law, the basic engineering principle that “If there are two or more ways to do something, and one of those ways can result in a catastrophe, someone will do it “(or, in other words: “If anything can go wrong, it will”).
REFERENCE: “The Fastest Man on Earth,” Nick T. Spark, Annals of Improbable Research, vol. 9, no. 5, Sept/Oct 2003.] VIDEO
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: (1) Author Nick T. Spark , on behalf of John Paul Stapp’s widow, Lilly. (2) Edward Murphy’s Edward A. Murphy III, on behalf of his late father. (3) George Nichols, via audio tape.
 
PHYSICS: Jack Harvey, John Culvenor, Warren Payne, Steve Cowley, Michael Lawrance, David Stuart, and Robyn Williams of Australia, for their irresistible report “An Analysis of the Forces Required to Drag Sheep over Various Surfaces.”
PUBLISHED IN: Applied Ergonomics, vol. 33, no. 6, November 2002, pp. 523-31.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: John Culvenor.
 
MEDICINE: Eleanor Maguire, David Gadian, Ingrid Johnsrude, Catriona Good, John Ashburner, Richard Frackowiak, and Christopher Frith of University College London, for presenting evidence that the brains of London taxi drivers are more highly developed than those of their fellow citizens.
PUBLISHED IN: “Navigation-Related Structural Change In the Hippocampi of Taxi Drivers,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 97, no. 8, April 11, 2000, pp. 4398-403. Also see their subsequent publications.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Eleanor Maguire.
 
PSYCHOLOGY: Gian Vittorio Caprara and Claudio Barbaranelli of the University of Rome, and Philip Zimbardo of Stanford University, for their discerning report “Politicians’ Uniquely Simple Personalities.”
PUBLISHED IN: Nature, vol. 385, February 1997, p. 493.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Philip Zimbardo.
 
CHEMISTRY: Yukio Hirose of Kanazawa University, for his chemical investigation of a bronze statue, in the city of Kanazawa, that fails to attract pigeons.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Yukio Hirose.
 
LITERATURE: John Trinkaus, of the Zicklin School of Business, New York City, for meticulously collecting data and publishing more than 80 detailed academic reports about things that annoyed him
(such as: What percentage of young people wear baseball caps with the peak facing to the rear rather than to the front; What percentage of pedestrians wear sport shoes that are white rather than some other color; What percentage of swimmers swim laps in the shallow end of a pool rather than the deep end; What percentage of automobile drivers almost, but not completely, come to a stop at one particular stop-sign; What percentage of commuters carry attaché cases; What percentage of shoppers exceed the number of items permitted in a supermarket’s express checkout lane; and What percentage of students dislike the taste of Brussels sprouts.)
REFERENCE: 86 of Professor Trinkaus’s publications are listed in “Trinkaus — An Informal Look,” Annals of Improbable Research, vol. 9, no. 3, May/Jun 2003.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: John Trinkaus.
 
ECONOMICS: Karl Schwärzler and the nation of Liechtenstein, for making it possible to rent the entire country for corporate conventions, weddings, bar mitzvahs, and other gatherings.
REFERENCE: <www.xnet.li> and <www.rentastate.com> and <www.rentavillage.com>
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Karl Schwärzler.
 
INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH: Stefano Ghirlanda, Liselotte Jansson, and Magnus Enquist of Stockholm University, for their report “Chickens Prefer Beautiful Humans.”
[PUBLISHED IN: Human Nature, vol. 13, no. 3, 2002, pp. 383-9.]
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: All three co-authors.
 
PEACE: Lal Bihari, of Uttar Pradesh, India, for a triple accomplishment: First, for leading an active life even though he has been declared legally dead; Second, for waging a lively posthumous campaign against bureaucratic inertia and greedy relatives; and Third, for creating the Association of Dead People.
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Lal Bihari overcame the handicap of being dead, and managed to obtain a passport from the Indian government so that he could travel to Harvard to accept his Prize. However, the U.S. government refused to allow him into the country. His friend Madhu Kapoor therefore came to the Ig Nobel Ceremony and accepted the Prize on behalf of Lal Bihari. Several weeks later, the Prize was presented to Lal Bihari himself in a special ceremony in India. [NOTE: Filmmaker Satish Kaushik made a film about the life (and death and life) of Lal Bihari.]
 
BIOLOGY: C.W. Moeliker, of Natuurhistorisch Museum Rotterdam, the Netherlands, for documenting the first scientifically recorded case of homosexual necrophilia in the mallard duck.
[REFERENCE: “The First Case of Homosexual Necrophilia in the Mallard Anas platyrhynchos (Aves: Anatidae)” C.W. Moeliker, Deinsea, vol. 8, 2001, pp. 243-7.]
WHO ATTENDED THE IG NOBEL CEREMONY: Kees Moeliker.
 

The 2002 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 3rd, 2002 at the 12th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
BIOLOGY: Norma Bubier, Charles G.M. Paxton, Phil Bowers, and D. Charles Deeming of the United Kingdom, for their report “Courtship Behaviour of Ostriches Towards Humans Under Farming Conditions in Britain.”
[REFERENCE: “Courtship Behaviour of Ostriches (Struthio camelus) Towards Humans Under Farming Conditions in Britain,” Norma E. Bubier, Charles G.M. Paxton, P. Bowers, D.C. Deeming, British Poultry Science, vol. 39, no. 4, September 1998, pp. 477-481.]
 
PHYSICS: Arnd Leike of the University of Munich, for demonstrating that beer froth obeys the mathematical Law of Exponential Decay.
[REFERENCE: “Demonstration of the Exponential Decay Law Using Beer Froth,” Arnd Leike, European Journal of Physics, vol. 23, January 2002, pp. 21-26.]
 
INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH: Karl Kruszelnicki of The University of Sydney, for performing a comprehensive survey of human belly button lint — who gets it, when, what color, and how much.
 
CHEMISTRY: Theodore Gray (USA and Switzerland), for gathering many elements of the periodic table, and assembling them into the form of a four-legged periodic table table.
 
MATHEMATICS: K.P. Sreekumar and the late G. Nirmalan of Kerala Agricultural University, India, for their analytical report “Estimation of the Total Surface Area in Indian Elephants.” [REFERENCE: “Estimation of the Total Surface Area in Indian Elephants (Elephas maximus indicus),” K.P. Sreekumar and G. Nirmalan, Veterinary Research Communications, vol. 14, no. 1, 1990, pp. 5-17.]
 
LITERATURE: Vicki Silvers Gier and David S. Kreiner of Central Missouri State University, for their colorful report “The Effects of Pre-Existing Inappropriate Highlighting on Reading Comprehension.” [ PUBLISHED IN: Reading Research and Instruction, vol. 36, no. 3, 1997, pp. 217-23.]
 
PEACE: Keita Sato, President of Takara Co., Dr. Matsumi Suzuki, President of Japan Acoustic Lab, and Dr. Norio Kogure, Executive Director, Kogure Veterinary Hospital, for promoting peace and harmony between the species by inventing Bow-Lingual, a computer-based automatic dog-to-human language translation device.
 
HYGIENE: Eduardo Segura, of Lavakan de Aste, in Tarragona, Spain, for inventing a washing machine for cats and dogs.
REFERENCE: “Station for Preparing Cleaning Disinfecting Delousing and Hydromassaging Animals,” US patent 7011044B2 .
 
ECONOMICS: The executives, corporate directors, and auditors of Enron, Lernaut & Hauspie [Belgium], Adelphia, Bank of Commerce and Credit International [Pakistan], Cendant, CMS Energy, Duke Energy, Dynegy, Gazprom [Russia], Global Crossing, HIH Insurance [Australia], Informix, Kmart, Maxwell Communications [UK], McKessonHBOC, Merrill Lynch, Merck, Peregrine Systems, Qwest Communications, Reliant Resources, Rent-Way, Rite Aid, Sunbeam, Tyco, Waste Management, WorldCom, Xerox, and Arthur Andersen, for adapting the mathematical concept of imaginary numbers for use in the business world. [NOTE: all companies are U.S.-based unless otherwise noted.]
 
MEDICINE: Chris McManus of University College London, for his excruciatingly balanced report, “Scrotal Asymmetry in Man and in Ancient Sculpture.” [PUBLISHED IN: Nature, vol. 259, February 5, 1976, p. 426.]
 

The 2001 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 4th, 2001 at the 11th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
MEDICINE: Peter Barss of McGill University, for his impactful medical report “Injuries Due to Falling Coconuts.”
[PUBLISHED IN: The Journal of Trauma, vol. 24, no. 11, 1984, pp. 990-1.]
 
PHYSICS: David Schmidt of the University of Massachusetts for his partial solution to the question of why shower curtains billow inwards.
 
BIOLOGY: Buck Weimer of Pueblo, Colorado for inventing Under-Ease, airtight underwear with a replaceable charcoal filter that removes bad-smelling gases before they escape.
 
ECONOMICS: Joel Slemrod, of the University of Michigan Business School, and Wojciech Kopczuk, of University of British Columbia [and who has since moved to Columbia University], for their conclusion that people find a way to postpone their deaths if that would qualify them for a lower rate on the inheritance tax.
[REFERENCE:”Dying to Save Taxes: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns on the Death Elasticity,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. W8158, March 2001.]
 
LITERATURE: John Richards of Boston, England, founder of The Apostrophe Protection Society, for his efforts to protect, promote, and defend the differences between plural and possessive.
 
PSYCHOLOGY: Lawrence W. Sherman of Miami University, Ohio, for his influential research report “An Ecological Study of Glee in Small Groups of Preschool Children.”
[PUBLISHED IN: Child Development, vol. 46, no. 1, March 1975, pp. 53-61.]
 
ASTROPHYSICS: Dr. Jack and Rexella Van Impe of Jack Van Impe Ministries, Rochester Hills, Michigan, for their discovery that black holes fulfill all the technical requirements to be the location of Hell.
[REFERENCE: The March 31, 2001 television and Internet broadcast of the “Jack Van Impe Presents” program. (at about the 12 minute mark).]
 
PEACE: Viliumas Malinauskus of Grutas, Lithuania, for creating the amusement park known as “Stalin World.”
 
TECHNOLOGY: Awarded jointly to John Keogh of Hawthorn, Victoria, Australia, for patenting the wheel in the year 2001, and to the Australian Patent Office for granting him Innovation Patent #2001100012. [NOTE: Several years after this prize was awarded, the patent office quietly revoked Mr. Keogh’s patent.]
 
PUBLIC HEALTH: Chittaranjan Andrade and B.S. Srihari of the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, India, for their probing medical discovery that nose picking is a common activity among adolescents.
[REFERENCE: “A Preliminary Survey of Rhinotillexomania in an Adolescent Sample,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, vol. 62, no. 6, June 2001, pp. 426-31.]
 

The 2000 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 5th, 2000 at the 10th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
PSYCHOLOGY: David Dunning of Cornell University and Justin Kruger of the University of Illinois, for their modest report, “Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficulties in Recognizing One’s Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assessments.” [Published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 77, no. 6, December 1999, pp. 1121-34.]
LITERATURE: Jasmuheen (formerly known as Ellen Greve) of Australia, first lady of Breatharianism, for her book “Living on Light,” which explains that although some people do eat food, they don’t ever really need to.
BIOLOGY: Richard Wassersug of Dalhousie University, for his first-hand report, “On the Comparative Palatability of Some Dry-Season Tadpoles from Costa Rica.” [Published in The American Midland Naturalist, vol. 86, no. 1, July 1971, pp. 101-109.]
PHYSICS: Andre Geim of the University of Nijmegen (the Netherlands) and Sir Michael Berry of Bristol University (UK), for using magnets to levitate a frog. [REFERENCE: “Of Flying Frogs and Levitrons” by M.V. Berry and A.K. Geim, European Journal of Physics, v. 18, 1997, p. 307-13.]
[REFERENCE: VIDEO]
NOTE: Ten years later, in 2010, Andre Geim won a Nobel Prize in physics (for research on another subject).
CHEMISTRY: Donatella Marazziti, Alessandra Rossi, and Giovanni B. Cassano of the University of Pisa, and Hagop S. Akiskal of the University of California (San Diego), for their discovery that, biochemically, romantic love may be indistinguishable from having severe obsessive-compulsive disorder. [REFERENCE: “Alteration of the platelet serotonin transporter in romantic love,” Marazziti D, Akiskal HS, Rossi A, Cassano GB, Psychological Medicine, 1999 May;29(3):741-5.]
ECONOMICS: The Reverend Sun Myung Moon, for bringing efficiency and steady growth to the mass-marriage industry, with, according to his reports, a 36-couple wedding in 1960, a 430-couple wedding in 1968, an 1800-couple wedding in 1975, a 6000-couple wedding in 1982, a 30,000-couple wedding in 1992, a 360,000-couple wedding in 1995, and a 36,000,000-couple wedding in 1997.
MEDICINE: Willibrord Weijmar Schultz, Pek van Andel, and Eduard Mooyaart of Groningen, The Netherlands, and Ida Sabelis of Amsterdam, for their illuminating report, “Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Male and Female Genitals During Coitus and Female Sexual Arousal.” [Published in British Medical Journal, vol. 319, 1999, pp 1596-1600.]
COMPUTER SCIENCE: Chris Niswander of Tucson, Arizona, for inventing PawSense, software that detects when a cat is walking across your computer keyboard.
PEACE: The British Royal Navy, for ordering its sailors to stop using live cannon shells, and to instead just shout “Bang!”
PUBLIC HEALTH: Jonathan Wyatt, Gordon McNaughton, and William Tullett of Glasgow, for their alarming report, “The Collapse of Toilets in Glasgow.” [Published in the Scottish Medical Journal, vol. 38, 1993, p. 185.]

The 1999 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, September 30th, 1999 at the 9th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
SOCIOLOGY: Steve Penfold, of York University in Toronto, for doing his PhD thesis on the sociology of Canadian donut shops.
REFERENCE: “The social life of donuts: Commodity and community in postwar Canada,” Steven Penfold, York University Ph.D. thesis, 2002.
PHYSICS: Len Fisher [UK and Australia] for calculating the optimal way to dunk a biscuit, and Jean-Marc Vanden-Broeck of the [UK and Belgium], and Joseph Keller [USA] for calculating how to make a teapot spout that does not drip.
REFERENCE: “Physics Takes the Biscuit“, Len Fisher, Nature, 397, no. 6719, February 11, 1999, p. 469.
REFERENCE: “Pouring Flows,” Jean-Marc Vanden‐Broeck and Joseph B. Keller, Physics of Fluids vol. 29, no. 12, 1986, pp. 3958-61.
LITERATURE: The British Standards Institution for its six-page specification (BS-6008) of the proper way to make a cup of tea.
SCIENCE EDUCATION: The Kansas State Board of Education and the Colorado State Board of Education, for mandating that children should not believe in Darwin‘s theory of evolution any more than they believe in Newton‘s theory of gravitation, Faraday‘s and Maxwell‘s theory of electromagnetism, or Pasteur‘s theory that germs cause disease.
MEDICINE: Dr. Arvid Vatle of Stord, Norway, for carefully collecting, classifying, and contemplating which kinds of containers his patients chose when submitting urine samples. (REFERENCE: “Unyttig om urinprøver,” Arvid Vatle, Tidsskift for Den norske laegeforening [The Journal of the Norwegian Medical Association], no. 8, March 20, 1999, p. 1178.)
CHEMISTRY: Takeshi Makino, president of The Safety Detective Agency in Osaka, Japan, for his involvement with S-Check, an infidelity detection spray that wives can apply to their husbands’ underwear.
BIOLOGY: Dr. Paul Bosland, director of The Chile Pepper Institute, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico, for breeding a spiceless jalapeno chile pepper.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION: Hyuk-ho Kwon of Kolon Company of Seoul, Korea, for inventing the self-perfuming business suit.
PEACE: Charl Fourie and Michelle Wong of Johannesburg, South Africa, for inventing an automobile burglar alarm consisting of a detection circuit and a flamethrower. (Patent WO/1999/032331, “A Security System for a Vehicle“)
MANAGED HEALTH CARE: The late George and Charlotte Blonsky of New York City and San Jose, California, for inventing a device (US Patent #3,216,423) to aid women in giving birth — the woman is strapped onto a circular table, and the table is then rotated at high speed.

The 1998 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 8th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live.
 
SAFETY ENGINEERING: Troy Hurtubise, of North Bay, Ontario, for developing, and personally testing a suit of armor that is impervious to grizzly bears. [REFERENCE: “Project Grizzly“, produced by the “National Film Board of Canada. ALSO: Bear Man: The Troy Hurtubise Saga, by Troy Hurtubise, Raven House Publishing, Westbrook, ME, USA, 2011.]
BIOLOGY: Peter Fong of Gettysburg College, Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, for contributing to the happiness of clams by giving them Prozac.
[REFERENCE: “Induction and Potentiation of Parturition in Fingernail Clams (Sphaerium striatinum) by Selective Serotonin Re- Uptake Inhibitors (SSRIs),” Peter F. Fong, Peter T. Huminski, and Lynette M. D’urso, “Journal of Experimental Zoology, vol. 280, 1998, pp. 260-64.]
PEACE: Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan, for their aggressively peaceful explosions of atomic bombs.
CHEMISTRY: Jacques Benveniste of France, for his homeopathic discovery that not only does water have memory, but that the information can be transmitted over telephone lines and the Internet.
[NOTE: Benveniste also won the 1991 Ig Nobel Chemistry Prize.]
[REFERENCE:”Transatlantic Transfer of Digitized Antigen Signal by Telephone Link,” J. Benveniste, P. Jurgens, W. Hsueh and J. Aissa, “Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology – Program and abstracts of papers to be presented during scientific sessions AAAAI/AAI.CIS Joint Meeting February 21-26, 1997”]
SCIENCE EDUCATION: Dolores Krieger, Professor Emerita, New York University, for demonstrating the merits of therapeutic touch, a method by which nurses manipulate the energy fields of ailing patients by carefully avoiding physical contact with those patients.
‘REFERENCE: “The Therapeutic Touch,” Dolores Krieger, Erik Peper, and Sonia Ancoli, The American Journal of Nursing, vol. 79, no. 4, 1979, pp. 660-662.]
STATISTICS: Jerald Bain of Mt. Sinai Hospital in Toronto and Kerry Siminoski of the University of Alberta for their carefully measured report, “The Relationships Among Height, Penile Length, and Foot Size.”
[REFERENCE: “Annals of Sex Research,” vol. 6, no. 3, 1993, pp. 231-5.
PHYSICS. Deepak Chopra of The Chopra Center for Well Being, La Jolla, California, for his unique interpretation of quantum physics as it applies to life, liberty, and the pursuit of economic happiness.
[REFERENCE: Deepak Chopra’s books “Quantum Healing,” “Ageless Body, Timeless Mind,” etc.]
ECONOMICS. Richard Seed  of Chicago for his efforts to stoke up the world economy by cloning himself and other human beings.
MEDICINE: To Patient Y and to his doctors, Caroline Mills, Meirion Llewelyn, David Kelly, and Peter Holt, of Royal Gwent Hospital, in Newport, Wales, for the cautionary medical report, “A Man Who Pricked His Finger and Smelled Putrid for 5 Years.” [Published in “The Lancet,” vol. 348, November 9, 1996, p. 1282.]
LITERATURE: Dr. Mara Sidoli of Washington, DC, for her illuminating report, “Farting as a Defence Against Unspeakable Dread.”
[REFERENCE: “Journal of Analytical Psychology,” vol. 41, no. 2, 1996, pp. 165-78.]

The 1997 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded at the 7th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live.
 
BIOLOGY: T. Yagyu, J. Wackermann, T. Kinoshita, T. Hirota, K. Kochi, I. Kondakor, Thomas König, and Dietrich Lehmann, from the University Hospital of Zurich, Switzerland, from Kansai Medical University in Osaka, Japan, and from Neuroscience Technology Research in Prague, Czech Republic, for measuring people’s brainwave patterns while they chewed different flavors of gum. [Published as “Chewing gum flavor affects measures of global complexity of multichannel EEG,” T. Yagyu, et al., Neuropsychobiology, vol. 35, 1997, pp. 46-50.]
ENTOMOLOGY: Mark Hostetler of the University of Florida, for his scholarly book, “That Gunk on Your Car,” which identifies the insect splats that appear on automobile windows. [The book is
published by Ten Speed Press.]
ASTRONOMY: Richard Hoagland of New Jersey, for identifying artificial features on the moon and on Mars, including a human face on Mars and ten-mile high buildings on the far side of the moon. [REFERENCE: “The Monuments of Mars: A City on the Edge of Forever,” by Richard C. Hoagland, North Atlantic Books, Berkeley, CA,1996.]
COMMUNICATIONS: Sanford Wallace, president of Cyber Promotions of Philadelphia — neither rain nor sleet nor dark of night have stayed this self-appointed courier from delivering electronic junk mail to all the world.
PHYSICS: John Bockris of Texas A&M University, for his wide-ranging achievements in cold fusion, in the transmutation of base elements into gold, and in the electrochemical incineration of domestic rubbish.
LITERATURE: Doron Witztum, Eliyahu Rips and Yoav Rosenberg of Israel, and Michael Drosnin of the United States, for their hairsplitting statistical discovery that the bible contains a secret, hidden code.[REFERENCE: Witztum, Rips and Rosenberg,’s original research was published as”Equidistant Letter Sequences in the Book of Genesis,” “Statistical Science,” Vol. 9, No. 3, 1994, pp. 429-38. Drosnin’s popular book, “The Bible Code,” was published by Simon & Schuster.]
MEDICINE: Carl J. Charnetski and Francis X. Brennan, Jr. of Wilkes University, and James F. Harrison of Muzak Ltd. in Seattle, Washington, for their discovery that listening to elevator Muzak stimulates immunoblobulin A (IgA) production, and thus may help prevent the common cold.
REFERENCE: “Effect of music and auditory stimuli on secretory immunoglobulin A (IgA),” Carl J. Charnetski, Francis X. Brennan, Jr. and James F. Harrison, Perceptual and Motor Skills, vol. 87, 1998, pp. 1163-70.
ECONOMICS: Akihiro Yokoi of Wiz Company in Chiba, Japan and Aki Maita of Bandai Company in Tokyo, the father and mother of Tamagotchi, for diverting millions of person-hours of work into the husbandry of virtual pets.
PEACE: Harold Hillman of the University of Surrey, England for his lovingly rendered and ultimately peaceful report “The Possible Pain Experienced During Execution by Different Methods.” [Published in Perception 1993, vol 22, pp. 745-53.]
METEOROLOGY: Bernard Vonnegut of the State University of Albany, for his revealing report, “Chicken Plucking as Measure of Tornado Wind Speed.” [Published in “Weatherwise,” October 1975, p. 217.]

The 1996 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 3rd, 1996 at the 6th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch archived video on C-SPAN.
 
BIOLOGY: Anders Barheim and Hogne Sandvik of the University of Bergen, Norway, for their tasty and tasteful report, “Effect of Ale, Garlic, and Soured Cream on the Appetite of Leeches.”
REFERENCE: “British Medical Journal,” vol. 309, Dec 24-31, 1994, p. 1689.
MEDICINE: James Johnston of R.J. Reynolds, Joseph Taddeo of U.S. Tobacco, Andrew Tisch of Lorillard, William Campbell of Philip Morris, Edward A. Horrigan of Liggett Group, Donald S. Johnston of American Tobacco Company, and the late Thomas E. Sandefur, Jr., chairman of Brown and Williamson Tobacco Co. for their unshakable discovery, as testified to the U.S. Congress, that nicotine is not addictive.
PHYSICS: Robert Matthews of Aston University, England, for his studies of Murphy’s Law, and especially for demonstrating that toast often falls on the buttered side.
REFERENCE: “Tumbling toast, Murphy’s Law and the fundamental constants,” “European Journal of Physics,” vol.16, no.4, July 18, 1995, p. 172-6.
PEACE: Jacques Chirac, President of France, for commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of Hiroshima with atomic bomb tests in the Pacific.
PUBLIC HEALTH: Ellen Kleist of Nuuk, Greenland and Harald Moi of Oslo, Norway, for their cautionary medical report “Transmission of Gonorrhea Through an Inflatable Doll.”
REFERENCE: “Genitourinary Medicine,” vol. 69, no. 4, Aug. 1993, p. 322.
CHEMISTRY: George Goble of Purdue University, for his blistering world record time for igniting a barbeque grill-three seconds, using charcoal and liquid oxygen.
BIODIVERSITY: Chonosuke Okamura of the Okamura Fossil Laboratory in Nagoya, Japan, for discovering the fossils of dinosaurs, horses, dragons, princesses, and more than 1000 other extinct “mini-species,” each of which is less than 1/100 of an inch in length.
REFERENCE: the series “Reports of the Okamura Fossil Laboratory,” published by the Okamura Fossil Laboratory in Nagoya, Japan during the 1970’s and 1980’s.
LITERATURE: The editors of the journal Social Text, for eagerly publishing research that they could not understand, that the author said was meaningless, and which claimed that reality does not exist.
REFERENCE: The paper was “Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity,” Alan Sokal, Social Text, Spring/Summer 1996, pp. 217-252.
ECONOMICS: Dr. Robert J. Genco of the University of Buffalo for his discovery that “financial strain is a risk indicator for destructive periodontal disease.
REFERENCES: (published after winning the prize): “Models to Evaluate the Role of Stress in Periodontal Disease,” Robert J. Genco, et al., Annals of Periodontology, vol. 3, no. 1, July 1998, pp. 288-302. “Relationship of Stress, Distress, and Inadequate Coping Behaviors to Periodontal Disease,” Robert J. Genco, et al., Journal of Periodontology, vol. 70, 1999, pp. 711-23.
ART: Don Featherstone of Fitchburg, Massachusetts, for his ornamentally evolutionary invention, the plastic pink flamingo.
REFERENCE: “Pink Flamingos: Splendor on the Grass”

The 1995 Ig Nobel Prizes were awarded on Thursday night, October 6th, 1995 at the 5th First Annual Ig Nobel Prize Ceremony, at Harvard’s Sanders Theatre. The ceremony was webcast live. You can watch the video on our youTube Channel.
 
NUTRITION: John Martinez of J. Martinez & Company in Atlanta, Georgia, for educating the world about Luak Coffee, the world’s most expensive coffee, which is made from coffee beans ingested and excreted by the luak (aka, the palm civet), a bobcat-like animal native to Indonesia.
PHYSICS: D.M.R. Georget, R. Parker, and A.C. Smith, of the Institute of Food Research, Norwich, England, for their rigorous analysis of soggy breakfast cereal, published in the report entitled “A Study of the Effects of Water Content on the Compaction Behaviour of Breakfast Cereal Flakes.”
REFERENCE: Powder Technology, November, 1994, vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 189-96.
ECONOMICS: Awarded jointly to Nick Leeson and his superiors at Barings Bank and to Robert Citron of Orange County, California, for using the calculus of derivatives to demonstrate that every financial institution has its limits.
REFERENCE: “Barings Lost : Nick Leeson and the Collapse of Barings Plc,” and “Big Bets Gone Bad”
MEDICINE: Marcia E. Buebel, David S. Shannahoff-Khalsa, and Michael R. Boyle, for their invigorating study entitled “The Effects of Unilateral Forced Nostril Breathing on Cognition.”
REFERENCE: International Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 57, 1991, pp. 239-249.
LITERATURE: David B. Busch and James R. Starling, of Madison Wisconsin, for their deeply penetrating research report, “Rectal foreign bodies: Case Reports and a Comprehensive Review of the World’s Literature.” The citations include reports of, among other items: seven light bulbs; a knife sharpener; two flashlights; a wire spring; a snuff box; an oil can with potato stopper; eleven different forms of fruits, vegetables and other foodstuffs; a jeweler’s saw; a frozen pig’s tail; a tin cup; a beer glass; and one patient’s remarkable ensemble collection consisting of spectacles, a suitcase key, a tobacco pouch and a magazine.
REFERENCE: Surgery, September 1986, pp. 512-519.
PEACE: The Taiwan National Parliament, for demonstrating that politicians gain more by punching, kicking and gouging each other than by waging war against other nations.
PSYCHOLOGY: Shigeru Watanabe, Junko Sakamoto, and Masumi Wakita, of Keio University, for their success in training pigeons to discriminate between the paintings of Picasso and those of Monet.
REFERENCE: “Pigeons’ Discrimination of Paintings by Monet and Picasso,”Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, vol. 63, 1995, pp. 165-174.
PUBLIC HEALTH: Martha Kold Bakkevig of Sintef Unimed in Trondheim, Norway, and Ruth Nielsen of the Technical University of Denmark, for their exhaustive study, “Impact of Wet Underwear on Thermoregulatory Responses and Thermal Comfort in the Cold.”
REFERENCE: Ergonomics, vol 37, no. 8, Aug. 1994 , pp. 1375-89.
DENTISTRY: Robert H. Beaumont, of Shoreview, Minnesota, for his incisive study “Patient Preference for Waxed or Unwaxed Dental Floss.”
REFERENCE: Journal of Periodontology, vol. 61, no. 2, Feb. 1990, pp. 123-5.]
CHEMISTRY: Bijan Pakzad of Beverly Hills, for creating DNA Cologne and DNA PERFUME, neither of which contain deoxyribonucleic acid, and both of which come in a triple helix bottle.

BIOLOGY: W. Brian Sweeney, Brian Krafte-Jacobs, Jeffrey W. Britton, and Wayne Hansen, for their breakthrough study, “The Constipated Serviceman: Prevalence Among Deployed US Troops,” and especially for their numerical analysis of bowel movement frequency. [Published in “Military Medicine,” vol. 158, August, 1993, pp. 346-348.]
PEACE: John Hagelin of Maharishi University and The Institute of Science, Technology and Public Policy, promulgator of peaceful thoughts, for his experimental conclusion that 4,000 trained meditators caused an 18 percent decrease in violent crime in Washington, D.C.
[REFERENCE: “Interim Report: Results of the National Demonstration Project to Reduce Violent Crime and Improve Governmental Effectiveness In Washington, D.C., June 7 to July 30, 1993, Institute of Science, Technology and Public Policy, Fairfield, Iowa”]
MEDICINE: This prize is awarded in two parts. First, to Patient X, formerly of the US Marine Corps, valiant victim of a venomous bite from his pet rattlesnake, for his determined use of electroshock therapy — at his own insistence, automobile sparkplug wires were attached to his lip, and the car engine revved to 3000 rpm for five minutes. Second, to Dr. Richard C. Dart of the Rocky Mountain Poison Center and Dr. Richard A. Gustafson of The University of Arizona Health Sciences Center, for their well-grounded medical report: “Failure of Electric Shock Treatment for Rattlesnake Envenomation.” [Published in Annals of Emergency Medicine, vol. 20, no. 6, June 1991, pp. 659-61.]
ENTOMOLOGY: Robert A. Lopez of Westport, NY, valiant veterinarian and friend of all creatures great and small, for his series of experiments in obtaining ear mites from cats, inserting them into his own ear, and carefully observing and analyzing the results. [Published as “Of Mites and Man,” The Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, vol. 203, no. 5, Sept. 1, 1993, pp. 606-7.]
PSYCHOLOGY: Lee Kuan Yew, former Prime Minister of Singapore, practitioner of the psychology of negative reinforcement, for his thirty-year study of the effects of punishing three million citizens of Singapore whenever they spat, chewed gum, or fed pigeons.
LITERATURE: L. Ron Hubbard, ardent author of science fiction and founding father of Scientology, for his crackling Good Book, “Dianetics,” which is highly profitable to mankind or to a portion thereof.
CHEMISTRY: Texas State Senator Bob Glasgow, wise writer of logical legislation, for sponsoring the 1989 drug control law which make it illegal to purchase beakers, flasks, test tubes, or other laboratory glassware without a permit.
ECONOMICS: Jan Pablo Davila of Chile, tireless trader of financial futures and former employee of the state-owned Codelco Company, for instructing his computer to “buy” when he meant “sell,” and subsequently attempting to recoup his losses by making increasingly unprofitable trades that ultimately lost .5 percent of Chile’s gross national product. Davila’s relentless achievement inspired\ his countrymen to coin a new verb: ” davilar,” meaning, “to botch things up royally.”
MATHEMATICS: The Southern Baptist Church of Alabama, mathematical measurers of morality, for their county-by-county estimate of how many Alabama citizens will go to Hell if they don’t repent.
[Click here for additional details.]

PSYCHOLOGY: John Mack of Harvard Medical School and David Jacobs of Temple University, mental visionaries, for their leaping conclusion that people who believe they were kidnapped by aliens from outer space, probably were — and especially for their conclusion “the focus of the abduction is the production of children. [REFERENCE: “Secret Life : Firsthand, Documented Accounts of UFO Abductions“]
CONSUMER ENGINEERING: Ron Popeil, incessant inventor and perpetual pitchman of late night television, for redefining the industrial revolution with such devices as the Veg-O-Matic, the Pocket Fisherman, Mr. Microphone, and the Inside-the-Shell Egg Scrambler. [REFERENCE: “The Salesman of the Century : Inventing, Marketing, and Selling on TV: How I Did It and How You Can Too!“]
BIOLOGY: Paul Williams Jr. of the Oregon State Health Division and Kenneth W. Newell of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, bold biological detectives, for their pioneering study, “Salmonella Excretion in Joy-Riding Pigs.” [Published in American Journal of Public Health and the Nation’s Health, vol. 60, no. 5, May 1970, pp. 926-9.]
ECONOMICS: Ravi Batra of Southern Methodist University, shrewd economist and best-selling author of “The Great Depression of 1990” ($17.95) and “Surviving the Great Depression of 1990” ($18.95), for selling enough copies of his books to single-handedly prevent worldwide economic collapse.
PEACE: The Pepsi-Cola Company of the Phillipines, suppliers of sugary hopes and dreams, for sponsoring a contest to create a millionaire, and then announcing the wrong winning number, thereby inciting and uniting 800,000 riotously expectant winners, and bringing many warring factions together for the first time in their nation’s history.
VISIONARY TECHNOLOGY: Presented jointly to Jay Schiffman of Farmington Hills, Michigan, crack inventor of AutoVision, an image projection device that makes it possible to drive a car and watch television at the same time, and to the Michigan state legislature, for making it legal to do so. REFERENCE: US patent #5061996A.
CHEMISTRY: James Campbell and Gaines Campbell of Lookout Mountain, Tennessee, dedicated deliverers of fragrance, for inventing scent strips, the odious method by which perfume is applied to magazine pages.
LITERATURE: Eric Topol, R. Califf, F. Van de Werf, P. W. Armstrong, and their 972 co-authors, for publishing a medical research paper which has one hundred times as many authors as pages. [REFERENCE: “An International Randomized Trial Comparing Four Thrombolytic Strategies for Acute Myocardial Infarction,” Eric Topol, R. Califf, F. Van de Werf, P. W. Armstrong, and the GUSTO Investigators, The New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 329, no. 10, September 2, 1993, pp. 673-82. The authors are from the following countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Israel, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Spain, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States.]
[Click here for additional details.]
MATHEMATICS: Robert Faid of Greenville, South Carolina, farsighted and faithful seer of statistics, for calculating the exact odds (710,609,175,188,282,000 to 1) that Mikhail Gorbachev is the Antichrist. [REFERENCE: “Gorbachev! Has the Real Antichrist Come?“]
PHYSICS: Louis Kervran of France, ardent admirer of alchemy, for his conclusion that the calcium in chickens’ eggshells is created by a process of cold fusion. REFERENCE: “Biological Transmutations and their applications in: Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Ecology, Medicine, Nutrition, Agronomy, Geology“]
MEDICINE: James F. Nolan, Thomas J. Stillwell, and John P. Sands, Jr., medical men of mercy, for their painstaking research report, “Acute Management of the Zipper-Entrapped Penis.” [Published in Journal of Emergency Medicine, vol. 8, no. 3, May/June 1990, pp. 305-7.]

MEDICINE: F. Kanda, E. Yagi, M. Fukuda, K. Nakajima, T. Ohta and O. Nakata of the Shisedo Research Center in Yokohama, for their pioneering research study “Elucidation of Chemical Compounds Responsible for Foot Malodour,” especially for their conclusion that people who think they have foot odor do, and those who don’t, don’t. [Published in British Journal of Dermatology, vol. 122, no. 6, June 1990, pp. 771-6.]
ARCHEOLOGY: Eclaireurs de France, the youth group whose name means “those who show the way,” fresh-scrubbed removers of grafitti, for erasing the ancient paintings from the walls of the Meyrieres Cave near the French village of Bruniquel.
ECONOMICS: The investors of Lloyds of London, heirs to 300 years of dull prudent management, for their bold attempt to insure disaster by refusing to pay for their company’s losses.
BIOLOGY: Dr. Cecil Jacobson, relentlessly generous sperm donor, and prolific patriarch of sperm banking, for devising a simple, single-handed method of quality control. [REFERENCE: “The Babymaker : Fertility Fraud and the Fall of Dr. Cecil Jacobson“]
CHEMISTRY: Ivette Bassa, constructor of colorful colloids, for her role in the crowning achievement of twentieth century chemistry, the synthesis of bright blue Jell-O.
PHYSICS: David Chorley and Doug Bower, lions of low-energy physics, for their circular contributions to field theory based on the geometrical destruction of English crops.
PEACE: Daryl Gates, former Police Chief of the City of Los Angeles, for his uniquely compelling methods of bringing people together.
NUTRITION: The utilizers of Spam, courageous consumers of canned comestibles, for 54 years of undiscriminating digestion.
LITERATURE: Yuri Struchkov, unstoppable author from the Institute of Nesmeyanov Institute of Organoelement Compounds in Moscow, for the 948 scientific papers he is credited with publishing between the years 1981 and 1990, averaging more than one every 3.9 days.
ART: Presented jointly to Jim Knowlton, modern Renaissance man, for his classic anatomy poster “Penises of the Animal Kingdom,” and to the U.S. National Endowment for the Arts for encouraging Mr. Knowlton to extend his work in the form of a pop-up book.
 

CHEMISTRY: Jacques Benveniste, prolific proseletizer and dedicated correspondent of “Nature,” for his persistent discovery that water, H2O, is an intelligent liquid, and for demonstrating to his satisfaction that water is able to remember events long after all trace of those events has vanished.
MEDICINE: Alan Kligerman, deviser of digestive deliverance, vanquisher of vapor, and inventor of Beano, for his pioneering work with anti-gas liquids that prevent bloat, gassiness, discomfort and embarassment.
EDUCATION: J. Danforth Quayle, consumer of time and occupier of space, for demonstrating,better than anyone else, the need for science education.
BIOLOGY: Robert Klark Graham, selector of seeds and prophet of propagation, for his pioneering development of the Repository for Germinal Choice, a sperm bank that accepts donations only from Nobellians and Olympians.
ECONOMICS: Michael Milken, titan of Wall Street and father of the junk bond, to whom the world is indebted.
LITERATURE: Erich von Daniken, visionary raconteur and author of “Chariots of the Gods,” for explaining how human civilization was influenced by ancient astronauts from outer space.
PEACE: Edward Teller, father of the hydrogen bomb and first champion of the Star Wars weapons system, for his lifelong efforts to change the meaning of peace as we know it.
 
Are these things real? Yes, indeed. You can look it up. That’s why we give you the references.
The only exceptions came in 1991, the very first year of the ceremony, and 1994. In 1991, three additional Prizes were given for apocryphal achievements. In 1994, one prize was based on what turned out to be erroneous press accounts. Those four apocryphal achievements are not included in the list on this page. ALL the other Prizes, in all years, were awarded for genuine achievements.
For extensive background info and additional reference for many of the past winners, see the books Marc Abrahams has written about Ig Nobel Prizes.
 












Subscribe to MINI-AIR

Email Address*



Name




 



Subscribe to MINI-AIR

Email Address*



Name




"
19,2025-09-20,"Potential matchups for the second preliminary round of the CAF Champions League 2025-2026Pyramids/@cafAll the heavyweights will be present, with the notable exception of Moroccan giants Wydad, who wil..."
